---
title: Confidence intervals around a safety level
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/05/ConfidenceIntervalA.html
date: 2005-05-11
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Confidence intervals
output: html_document
---
**[StATS]:** **Confidence intervals around a safety
level (created 2005-05-11)**.

Someone asked me about an environmental clean up. The government told
them that the location was cleaned up to a 90% confidence level of the
standard. Would this give the residents an assurance that everything was
safe?

I don't have the background to answer all of this question, but can
comment on the Statistical aspects.

The government has set a standard that represents a safe level of
exposure. How that standard is set is always controversial and some
people will argue that it should be higher and some will argue that it
should be lower. Let's assume that the standard that they set is
reasonable, because I would not be able to tell you whether it is or it
isn't.

Let me make up a number, 500, and pretend that anything less than that
represents a safe level of exposure. Where the Statistics will come into
play is with the 90% confidence level.

There are some limitations in how you sample exposure levels. You can't
sample all times and all locations, because it would cost too much
and/or would take too long to get an answer. So the government tells
you, in acknowledgement of the fact that they can't do a completely
comprehensive study (no one could be perfectly comprehensive, to be
honest), they will make sure that the levels are lower than the safe
level.

How much lower? Low enough so that even after allowing for sampling
error, there is still evidence that the levels are safe. So a
measurement of 450+/-50 would work, or 300+/-200, or 100+/-400 or even
495+/-5. If that's the way they did it, it actually works to your
advantage. They wouldn't want to do a haphazard job of sampling,
because then the margin of sampling error would be so large that they
could never get the plant clean enough. The confidence interval of
100+/-400 might represent such a scenario. So they have a financial
incentive to make sure that the sampling that they do is thorough and
complete. But of course, they would not want to make the sampling overly
ornate. If their interval were 495 +/-5, they would be spending too much
money on the sampling, and maybe they should have spent some of that
money doing a bit of extra clean up.

Here's a numeric example to illustrate the problem. Let's suppose that
the current level of the environmental site is at 600, a dangerous
level. Let's also suppose that it costs 10,000 to reduce the level by
one unit. If there were no issues with sampling error, then the cost of
the clean-up would be one million dollars (100 units of reduction times
10 thousand dollars per unit).

But the sampling to indicate how much we have reduced the level is both
imperfect and expensive. It costs 5,000 per site to sample and the
standard deviation for any individual site measurement would be 200
units. You can use the spreadsheet

-   [SingleMeanCI.xls](../01/images/SingleMeanCI.xls)

to calculate 90% confidence intervals. Let's suppose first that we
wanted to do a minimal job of sampling and only selected 8 sites to
sample. We would get 90% confidence limits of +/-134. That means that we
would have to spend an extra 1.34 million dollars to get the remediation
needed so that our upper confidence limit was still in the safe range.
But at least the sampling wouldn't cost so much. We would have only
spent 40 thousand dollars on the sampling. Total bill: 2.38 million
dollars.

With a sample of 100 sites, the confidence interval would be +/- 33. The
cost of the extra remediation is now only 330,000, but the cost of the
sampling has jumped up to 500,000. Total bill: 1.83 million dollars.

With a sample of 500 sites, the confidence interval would be +/- 15. So
there would only be 150,000 in extra remediation costs. But the cost
of the sampling has gone through the roof. We're now paying 2,500,000
just for the sampling. Total bill: 3.65 million.

Here's a graph of all possible sample sizes and total costs.

![SafetyLevel.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/05/ConfidenceIntervalA01.png)

It turns out that the most economical sample size is 50. It leads a
confidence interval of +/-47 and a total bill of 1.72 million dollars.

Now, why did the government use a 90% interval rather than a 95%
interval? It turns out that when you are interested in errors only in
one direction (no one is unhappy if the plant is cleaner than you
estimate it to be), then a 90% interval makes more sense. The EPA did
this with their report on passive smoking. They wanted to see if there
was evidence that passive smoking caused lung cancer. They use a 90%
confidence interval because no one treated seriously the possibility
that passive smoking was protective against lung cancer. Well almost no
one. The tobacco companies found a judge in North Carolina who told the
EPA that a 90% confidence level violated the scientific norms and tossed
out their report.

This is a bit of a digression, but what is the bottom line? I cannot
comment on whether 500 is a safe level or if it should be higher or
lower. The only thing I know for sure is that zero is an unreasonable
value.

I can comment on the confidence intervals, though. If the government set
up the confidence intervals in a way so that they were forced to err on
the safe side if the sampling plan was inadequate, then you have a good
deal of protection, because it then forces them to use a thorough rather
than a haphazard sampling plan.

This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Confidence
intervals](../category/ConfidenceIntervals.html).
<!---More--->
intervals](../category/ConfidenceIntervals.html).
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Confidence
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy

<!---Do not use
**[StATS]:** **Confidence intervals around a safety
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Confidence
intervals](../category/ConfidenceIntervals.html).
--->

