---
title: A simple example of a Kaplan-Meier curve
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/08/SimpleKm-08.html
date: 2008-01-24
category: Blog post
tags: Survival analysis
output: html_document
---
**[StATS]:** **A simple example of a Kaplan-Meier
curve (updated January 24, 2008)**.

In response to a query, I wanted to write up a simple example of how to
calculate survival probabilities when you have censored data. It is
adapted from Chapter 6 of my book, [Statistical Evidence in Medical
Trials](../evidence.asp). I have updated and simplified the example, for
possible use in a second edition of the book, if I am so lucky.

Survival data models provide interpretation of data representing the
time until an event occurs. In many situations, the event is death, but
it can also represent the time to other bad events such as cancer
relapse or failure of a medical device. It can also be used to denote
time to positive events such as pregnancy.

Survival data models also incorporate one of the complexities of \"time
to event\" data, the fact that not all patients experience the event
during the time frame of the study. So, if we are doing a five year
mortality study, we have the problem of those stubborn patients who
refuse to die during the study period. Other patients may move out of
town halfway through the study and are lost to follow-up. In a study of
medical devices, sometimes the device continues to work up to a certain
time, but then has to be removed, not because the device failed, but
because the patient got healthier and no longer needed the device.

These observations are called censored observations. With censored
observations, the actual time of the event is unknown but we do know
that it would not be any earlier than the time that the last evaluation
or follow-up visit was done. These censored observations provide partial
information. They influence our estimates of survival probability up to
the last evaluation or follow-up, but do not provide any information
about survival probabilities beyond that point. To disregard this
information is dangerous and could seriously bias your results.

The following data represents survival time for a group of fruit flies
and is a subset of a larger data set found at the [Data and Story
Library (DASL)](../category/InterestingWebsites.html#DaStLi). The data
set has been slightly modified to simplify some of these explanations.

There are 25 flies in the sample, with the first fly dying on day 37 and
the last fly dying on day 96. If you wanted to estimate the survival
probability for this data, you would draw a curve that decreases by 4%
(1/25) every time a fly dies.

`Day Prob    37 96%    40 92%    43 88%    44 84%    45 80%    47 76%    49 72%    54 68%    56 64%    58 60%    59 56%    60 52%    61 48%    62 44%    68 40%    70 36%    71 32%    72 28%    73 24%    75 20%    77 16%    79 12%    89  8%    94  4%    96  0%`

Here\'s a graph of these probabilities over time.

![](images/Simple1.gif){width="397" height="283"}

By tradition and for some rather technical reasons, you should use a
stair step pattern rather than a diagonal line to connect adjacent
survival probabilities.

Now let\'s alter the experiment. Suppose that totally by accident, a
technician leaves the screen cover open on day 70 and all the flies
escape. This includes the fly who was going to die on the afternoon of
the 70th day anyway. Oh the sadness of it all; the poor fly has the
briefest of tastes of freedom then ends up shriveled up on a window
sill.

You\'re probably worried that the whole experiment has been ruined. But
don\'t be so pessimistic. You still have complete information on
survival of the fruit flies up to their 70th day of life. Here\'s how
you would present the data and estimate the survival probabilities.

`Day Prob    37 96%    40 92%    43 88%    44 84%    45 80%    47 76%    49 72%    54 68%    56 64%    58 60%    59 56%    60 52%    61 48%    62 44%    68 40%    70+ ?    70+ ?    70+ ?    70+ ?    70+ ?    70+ ?    70+ ?    70+ ?    70+ ?    70+ ?`

We clearly have enough data to make several important statements about
survival probability. For example, the median survival time is 61 days
because roughly half of the flies had died before this day.

Here is a graph of the survival probabilities of the second experiment.
This graph is identical to the graph in the first experiment up to day
70 after which you can no longer estimate survival probabilities.

![](images/Simple2.gif){width="397" height="283"}

By the way, you might be tempted to ignore the ten flies who escaped.
But that would seriously bias your results. All of these flies were
tough and hardy flies who lived well beyond the median day of death. If
you pretended that they didn\'t exist, you would seriously underestimate
the survival probabilities. The median survival time, for example, of
the 15 flies who did not escape, for example, is only 54 days which is
much smaller than the actual median.

Let\'s look at a third experiment, where the screen cover is left open
and all but four of the remaining flies escape. It turns out that those
four remaining flies who didn\'t bug out will allow us to still get
reasonable estimates of survival probabilities beyond 70 days. Here is
the data and the survival probabilities.

`Day Prob    37 96%    40 92%    43 88%    44 84%    45 80%    47 76%    49 72%    54 68%    56 64%    58 60%    59 56%    60 52%    61 48%    62 44%    68 40%    70+ ?    71 30%    70+ ?    70+ ?    75 20%    70+ ?    70+ ?    89 10%    70+ ?    96  0%`

What you do with the six escaped flies is to allocate their survival
probabilities equally among the four flies who didn\'t bug out. This
places a great responsibility among each of those four remaining flies
since each one is now responsible for 10% of the remaining survival
probability, their original 4% plus 6% more which represents a fourth of
the 24% survival probability that was lost with the six escaping flies.

Another way of looking at this is that the six flies who escaped
influence the denominator of the survival probabilities up to day 70 and
then totally drop out of the calculations for any further survival
probabilities. Because the denominator has been reduced, the jumps at
each remaining death are much larger.

Here is a graph of the survival probability estimates from the third
experiment.

![](images/Simple3.gif){width="397" height="283"}

These survival probabilities differ only slightly from the survival
probabilities in the original experiment. This works out because the
mechanism that caused us to lose information on six of the fruit flies
was independent of their ultimate survival.

If the censoring mechanism were somehow related to survival prognosis,
then you would have the possibility of serious bias in your estimates.
Suppose for example, that only the toughest of flies (those with the
most days left in their short lives) would have been able to escape. The
flies destined to die on days 70, 71, 72, and 73, were already on their
deathbeds and unable to fly at all, much les make a difficult escape.
Then these censored values would not be randomly interspersed among the
remaining survival times, but would constitute some of the larger
values. But since these larger values would remain unobserved, you would
underestimate survival probabilities beyond the 70th day.

This is known as informative censoring, and it happens more often that
you might expect. Suppose someone drops out of a cancer mortality study
because they are abandoning the drugs being studied in favor of laetrile
treatments down in Mexico. Usually, this is a sign that the current
drugs are not working well, so a censored observation here might
represent a patient with a poorer prognosis. Excluding these patients
would lead to an overestimate of survival probabilities.

When you see a survival curve in a research paper, there are two ways to
interpret it. First, you can get an estimate of the median (or other
percentiles) by projecting horizontally until you intersect with the
survival curve and then head down to get your estimate. In the survival
curve we have just looked at, you would estimate the median survival as
slightly more than 60 days.

![](images/Simple4.gif){width="397" height="283"}

You can also estimate probabilities for survival at any given time by
projecting up from the time and then moving to the left to estimate the
probability. In the example below, you can see that the 80 day survival
probability is a little bit less than 25%.

![](images/Simple5.gif){width="397" height="283"}

[](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/us/) This page was written
by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy Hospital. Although I
do not hold the copyright for this material, I am reproducing it here as
a service, as it is no longer available on the Children\'s Mercy
Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page with [general
help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse for pages
similar to this one at [Category: Survival
analysis](../category/SurvivalAnalysis.html).
<!---More--->
analysis](../category/SurvivalAnalysis.html).
similar to this one at [Category: Survival
help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse for pages
Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page with [general
a service, as it is no longer available on the Children\'s Mercy
do not hold the copyright for this material, I am reproducing it here as
by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy Hospital. Although I
[](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/us/) This page was written

<!---Do not use
**[StATS]:** **A simple example of a Kaplan-Meier
[](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/us/) This page was written
by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy Hospital. Although I
do not hold the copyright for this material, I am reproducing it here as
a service, as it is no longer available on the Children\'s Mercy
Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page with [general
help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse for pages
similar to this one at [Category: Survival
analysis](../category/SurvivalAnalysis.html).
--->

