---
title: "PMean: What to do about claims of borderline statistical significance"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/borderline-significance/"
date: "2018-09-21"
categories: Blog post
tags: Hypothesis testing
output: html_document
---

A comment about the phrase "trend towards efficiency" on the Statistical
Consulting Section discussion board raised a lot of interesting
commentary. The phrase refers to a setting where the p-value is not
small enough to allow you to claim statistical significance, but still
was close enough to 0.05 to be worth commenting on. Most of responses
were fairly negative and stressed that we need to refuse to sign off on
any report of publication using that phrase. I posted a response that
differed from the others. Here's the gist of what I said.

<!---More--->

There are several reasons why we should encourage the use of terms like
"trend towards efficacy" or (one I've seen more often) "borderline
statistical significance."

First, we statisticians have been at the forefront of trying to get
researchers to recognize the arbitrariness of the alpha=0.05 cutoff. In
a class on survival analysis, I recently used a data set where the Wald
test gave a p-value of 0.0491 and the likelihood ratio test gave a
p-value of 0.0527. I argued that the two p-values were saying pretty
much the same thing. Some researchers (and apparently some
statisticians) think that we should say something very different about
0.0527 versus 0.0491. This is a mistake. I'd be happier if researchers
used the term "borderline" to refer to anything that comes within
kissing distance of 0.05 whether from the left side or the right side.
But if someone recognizes that a p-value slightly larger than 0.05 is
still worth discussion, I think that is a step in the right direction.

A term like "trend towards efficacy" tends to minimize the "black and
white" nature of hypothesis testing. If you want to draw a "black"
conclusion for p-values greater than 0.10, a "gray" conclusion for
p-values between 0.05 and 0.10, and a "white" conclusion for p-values
smaller than 0.05, that's an improvement because a trichotomy always
throws away less information than a dichotomy.

Second, researchers tend to focus too much on the p-value and not enough
on other pieces of evidence to support or refute their hypothesis.
Things like plausible mechanisms, consistency with other findings,
dose-response patterns, etc. What I've noticed is that scientists are
very eager to bring in other evidence like mechanisms when they have a
"borderline" p-value. That's a habit that we want to develop and
encourage. If they get in the habit of doing this for "borderline"
p-values, they may eventually adopt these approaches for p-values that
are not borderline.

Finally, I believe that the recommendation of Dr. Bristol makes us
appear arrogant to our colleagues. We are saying that most readers of
this research are stupid and need to be protected by us from drawing
false conclusions about a p-value of 0.08. In my experience, most
readers are pretty smart at interpreting Statistics. They do not over
react to a borderline p-value. They approach it cautiously and try to
bring other evidence to bear on the problem.

One of my teachers from the University of Iowa made the interesting
observation that statisticians are the guardians of the scientific
method. This is a great quote, but I think with it comes a bit too much
pride. Others also have a mission of upholding the scientific method,
and we should not dictate to them and lecture them too much. We are
getting self-righteous about a choice of words that is already well
established in the research community, is well understood by the
research community, and is treated with an appropriate amount of
skepticism.

We should also view the "borderline" p-values as a teaching opportunity.
In particular, the confidence interval becomes very important in these
settings. More important than the location of the p-value relative to
0.05 or 0.10 is the location of the upper confidence limit relative to
the minimum clinically important difference. So if someone wants to use
the phrase "trending to efficacy," that's okay but they should also talk
about whether the confidence interval, though including the null value,
still stretches up far enough to include values that are clinically
important.


