---
title: "Some interesting quality improvement resources"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/qi-resources/"
date: "2018-05-13"
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Quality improvement
output: html_document
---

I attended a [conference on quality and patient
safety](http://med.umkc.edu/research/qips/patient-safety-day/), and some
of the speakers mentioned some interesting resources. I googled them and
saved the links here.

<!---More--->

**Patient Quality Indicators**. "The Prevention Quality Indicators
(PQIs) are a set of measures that can be used with hospital inpatient
discharge data to identify quality of care for "ambulatory care
sensitive conditions." These are conditions for which good outpatient
care can potentially prevent the need for hospitalization or for which
early intervention can prevent complications or more severe disease."
Available at
<http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/modules/pqi_overview.aspx>.

**Clinical classification software for ICD-9-CM**. "The Clinical
Classifications Software (CCS) for ICD-9-CM is a diagnosis and procedure
categorization scheme that can be employed in many types of projects
analyzing data on diagnoses and procedures. CCS is based on the
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical
Modification (ICD-9-CM), a uniform and standardized coding system. The
ICD-9-CM's multitude of codes -- over 14,000 diagnosis codes and 3,900
procedure codes -- are collapsed into a smaller number of clinically
meaningful categories that are sometimes more useful for presenting
descriptive statistics than are individual ICD-9-CM codes." Available at
<https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs/ccs.jsp>.

**MedEd Portal**. "A peer-reviewed, open-access journal that promotes
educational scholarship and dissemination of teaching and assessment
resources in the health professions" Available at
<https://www.mededportal.org/>.

**Toward stronger evidence on quality improvement. Draft publication
guidelines: the beginning of a consensus project.** "In contrast with
the primary goals of science, which are to discover and disseminate new
knowledge, the primary goal of improvement is to change performance.
Unfortunately, scholarly accounts of the methods, experiences, and
results of most medical quality improvement work are not published,
either in print or electronic form. In our view this failure to publish
is a serious deficiency: it limits the available evidence on efficacy,
prevents critical scrutiny, deprives staff of the opportunity and
incentive to clarify thinking, slows dissemination of established
improvements, inhibits discovery of innovations, and compromises the
ethical obligation to return valuable information to the public.The
reasons for this failure are many: competing service responsibilities of
and lack of academic rewards for improvement staff; editors' and peer
reviewers' unfamiliarity with improvement goals and methods; and lack of
publication guidelines that are appropriate for rigorous, scholarly
improvement work. We propose here a draft set of guidelines designed to
help with writing, reviewing, editing, interpreting, and using such
reports. We envisage this draft as the starting point for collaborative
development of more definitive guidelines. We suggest that medical
quality improvement will not reach its full potential unless accurate
and transparent reports of improvement work are published frequently and
widely." Available at
<http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/content/14/5/319.short>.

**Improving the Quality of Quality Improvement Reporting. Standards for
Quality Improvement Reporting Excellence (SQUIRE) 2.0 Guidelines**
"SQUIRE provides an explicit framework for those "studying QI" by
describing in-depth the improvement interventions, their site-specific
contexts, and their results. However, despite endorsement by multiple
journals, SQUIRE has not been widely adopted. SQUIRE 2.0, which is the
next iteration, has been modified based on significant stakeholder input
to simplify and streamline the reporting standards.6 The second version
outlines 18 items that should be considered in reporting a QI effort,
but allows for flexibility in determining whether each item is necessary
or appropriate." Available at
<https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamasurgery/fullarticle/2482672>.




