---
title: Calculation of Analysis of Means limits
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/07/AnomCalculations1.html
date: 2007-03-06
category: Blog post
tags: Analysis of means
output: html_document
---
**[StATS]: Calculation of Analysis of Means limits
(created 2007-03-06)**.

This page shows some of the details for calculating an analysis of means
(ANOM) chart.

**Resistivity example**. This data set comes from the National
Institutes of Standards and Technology

-   <http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/strd/anova/SiRstv.html>

The first three digits of the data values are constant, so you need to
be careful in calculating means and standard deviations. Do not round
with this data set. Resistivity measurements were recorded five times on
five separate instruments. There is some concern that the instruments
may have small but important differences in resistivity.

`Instrument     1        2                3        4        5        196.3052 196.3042 196.1303 196.2795 196.2119        196.1240 196.3825 196.2005 196.1748 196.1051        196.1890 196.1669 196.2889 196.1494 196.1850        196.2569 196.3257 196.0343 196.1485 196.0052        196.3403 196.0422 196.1811 195.9885 196.2090`

Compare these five instruments using an ANOM chart.

`  mean     var                 stdev        1 196.2431 0.007651577 0.08747329        2 196.2443 0.019037095 0.13797498        3 196.1670 0.008784212 0.09372413        4 196.1481 0.010863213 0.10422674        5 196.1432 0.007823043 0.08844797`

The average of the five means is 196.1892 and the average of the five
variances is 0.01083183. The square root of this value, 0.1040761, is
the pooled standard deviation.

The formulas for the decision limits in an ANOM chart are

![](images/anom01.gif)

where

![](images/anom03.gif)

In this example, I is 5 and N-I is 20. The value of h from the [table of
critical values for a balanced ANOM](AnomTable05Part1.html) is 2.80. The
ANOM decision limits are

![](images/anom12.gif)

and the ANOM chart looks like this:

![](images/anom13.gif)

All five means are inside the decision limits, so you would conclude
that no individual mean differs from the overall average.

You can also use an ANOM chart for the standard deviations. I will not
show the formulas or the calculations for this chart, but here is what
it looks like:

![](images/anom14.gif)

All standard deviations are inside the decision limits, so you would
conclude that no individual standard deviation differs from the pooled
standard deviation.

**Toy slingshot**. I asked a group of three volunteers to collect some
data on their accuracy at hitting a target with a toy slingshot. They
took three shots with their dominant hand and measured the distance of
each shot from the target. Then they took three shots with their
non-dominant hand and took three shots at the target. Their results are
recorded below

`Name Shot1 Shot2 Shot3         J-D    62    20    14         J-N    21     9    37         A-D    20    24    37         A-N    43    40    26         M-D    17    75    29         M-N    27    21    59`

My intention was to treat these six rows as if they represented six
separate individuals (I did not have enough volunteers!). This is
perhaps a bit of an oversimplification, and some time in the future I
want to analyze the data as a two factor study. For this weblog entry,
though, I want to plot these results using an analysis of means chart
with a factor having six levels.

The summary statistics are easily computed.

`Name   Mean     Var   Stdev         J-D  32.00  684.00   26.15         J-N  22.33  197.33   14.05         A-D  27.00   79.00    8.89         A-N  36.33   82.33    9.07         M-D  40.33  937.33   30.62         M-N  35.67  417.33   20.43`

The average of the six means is 32.28. The average variance is 399.6,
and the square root of this value, 19.99, represents the pooled standard
deviation.

In this example, I is 6 and N is 18. The critical value h is 3.07. The
upper decision limit is 64.62, as shown below

![](images/anom04.gif)

and the lower decision limit is -0.06, as shown below

![](images/anom05.gif)

We round the lower decision limit up to zero because a negative result
is impossible in this experiment. Here is a graph showing the individual
means and the ANOM limits.

![](images/anom06.gif)

Even though there is some disparity in the mean values, these
disparities are well within the limits of sampling error.

Although an ANOM chart for the standard deviations is theoretically
possible, you should not calculate such a chart unless you have more
observations contributing to each individual standard deviation.

**Hypothetical change in sample size**. For a process with as much
randomness as this, it may make sense to ask each individual to shoot at
the target five or ten times. What would the decision limits look like
if these individual means and standard deviations were based on ten runs
rather than three?

In this case, the value of I would remain the same (6) but the value of
N would increase to 60. The critical value for h would be 2.71. The
upper decision limit is 47.92

![](images/Anom07.gif)

and the lower decision limit is

![](images/anom08.gif)

**Improvement in toy slingshot experiment**. The group then worked on
the process and made some improvements. Here is the data after the
process was improved

`J-D 52 12 18        J-N  5  2 34         A-D  9 22 17         A-N 22 19  8         M-D 25 29 10        M-N 27  3 15 `

The summary statistics for each group are

`Name   Mean     Var   Stdev         J-D  27.33  465.33   21.57         J-N  13.67  312.33   17.67         A-D  16.00   43.00    6.56          A-N  16.33   54.33    7.37          M-D  21.33  100.33   10.02         M-N  15.00  144.00   12.00         Avg  18.28  186.56`

The square root of the average variance, 13.65, represents the pooled
standard deviation. The decision limits are

![](images/anom15.gif)

and

![](images/anom16.gif)

which we round to zero. The ANOM chart is

![](images/anom17.gif)

Again, all data points are inside the decision limits.

**Analysis of proportions**. The analysis simplifies somewhat if your
data is a set of proportions rather than a set of means. You no longer
need to compute a pooled standard deviation, but instead use a formula
for variation that is a simple function of the average proportion. You
also do not need to calculate degrees of freedom, and can treat them as
an infinite number of degrees of freedom. This is effectively the same
thing as replacing a t-distribution with a normal distribution. Here is
the formula.

![](images/anom10.gif)

A worker is asked to compare four different hearing tests to assure that
they are of comparable difficulty.

`Test-1 86%        Test-2 56%        Test-3 90%        Test-4 86%`

The results represent the percentage of words out of fifty that are
identified correctly. The average of these four proportions is 0.795.
The decision limits are computed as

![](images/anom20.gif)

and the ANOM chart looks like

![](images/anom21.gif)

The second test appears to be more difficult than average.

**On your own.**

1\. A different group of volunteers was asked to shoot a toy rocket at a
target (data shown below). Six different people recorded their accuracy
on two consecutive shots. Calculate an ANOM chart for this data.

`A 14 39        B 60 20        C 26  9        D  9 12        E 36 21        F 53 18`

2\. The following data is fictional. Twenty separate laboratories were
sent identical images of a sperm smear with exactly 100 sperm cells and
were asked to estimate the proportion of normal cells on the image using
WHO-3 standards (data shown below). Calculate an ANOM chart for these
proportions. Don\'t peek but the answers are available on a [separate
web page](PControlChartAnswers.asp).

`25 23 22 18 24 30 22 28 29 15        19 35 33 35 33 17 19 19 40 26`

This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children\'s Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Analysis of
means](../category/AnalysisOfMeans.html).
<!---More--->
means](../category/AnalysisOfMeans.html).
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Analysis of
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
Children\'s Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy

<!---Do not use
**[StATS]: Calculation of Analysis of Means limits
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children\'s Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Analysis of
means](../category/AnalysisOfMeans.html).
--->

