---
title: "PMean: Too many different prior choices for the hierarchical beta binomial model"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/too-many-priors/"
date: "2016-05-31"
category: Blog post
tags: Bayesian statistics
output: html_document
---

I'm interested in studying how Bayesian hierarchical models work and I
want to start with what seems like the simplest case, the hierarchical
beta-binomial model. It's actually not that simple, it seems. There are
too many choices for the hyperprior that you use in this
setting.

<!---More--->

If you run a google search on the hierarchical beta binomial model, you
see a lot of helpful choices.  Many of these are PDFs and my system does
not let me track the URLs of PDF files that easily. But you should be
able to find these easily. Also, many of these PDFs are Powerpoint
slides. Powerpoint slides are usually too sketchy to be useful, but
these slides are pretty nice.

There are at least three general approaches and within each approach,
there are differing recommendations.

Approach \#1. Assume a beta prior on the binomial proportions, model the
hyperparameters of the beta distribution directly.

Conjugate Priors, Hierarchical Models, Comparing Ranks through
Simulation (no author given) starts with a binomial distribution and
places a beta prior on that distribution. It then suggests two gamma
distribution for the hyperparameters of the beta distribution, though
this reference does not say which particular gamma distribution.

Brice D. L. Acree & Thomas Carsey, Bayesian Hierarchical Models, June 4,
2015 proposes that the binomial proportions come from a beta
distribution and that the two hyperparameters from the beta distribution
are both uniform on the interval 0 to 10.

Approach \#2. Assume a beta prior distribution on the binomial
proportions, but transform the hyperparameters of the beta distribution.

Kathryn Blackmond Laskey, Bayesian Inference and Decision Theory, Unit
7: Hierarchical Bayesian Models recommends that you transform the
hyperparameters of the beta distribution. Dr. Laskey proposes this
transformation because the two hyperparameters of the beta distribution
are so closely correlated that the Gibbs sampling is inefficient. Her
transformation, and the only transformation that others consider is
U=alpha/(alpha+beta) and V=alpha+beta. U is the mean of the beta
distribution and V is rough measure of the precision of the beta
distribution with larger values implying more precision. She suggests a
uniform distribution for U and a gamma(1,20) distribution for V. She
uses the rat tumor data from Gelman et al.

Brian Junker, 36-724 Spring 2006: Metropolis-Hastings Example, February
22, 2006 also uses a beta distribution for alpha/(alpha+beta) but
suggests a Pareto distribution for (alpha+beta).  The Pareto is a power
law distribution and the power that Dr. Junker recommends 1.5. You have
to read his arguments, but it involves a transformation of a fairly
standard normal hierarchical model.

Manojit Nandi, A/B Testing with Hierarchical Models in Python -- Domino
Blog, also recommends the same Pareto distribution, and cites Andrew
Gelman's book (Bayesian Data Analysis, with John Carlin, Hal Stern,
David Dunson, Aki Veharti, and Donald Rubin) as the rationale.

Bob Carpenter, Hierarchical Bayesian Batting Ability, with Multiple
Comparisons, also uses the Pareto distribution, but with no references
or other justification.

Andrew Gelman, Some practical questions about prior distributions,
October 21, 2009 reviews his earlier book recommendations and suggests
that perhaps a half Cauchy distribution for 1/sqrt(alpha+beta) would be
better than his earlier recommendation of an improper
uniform(0,infinity) prior on that same parameter.

Approach \#3. Transform the binomial proportions to something that can
be easily modeled using normal distributions.

Pablo Verde, Lecture 12: Introduction to Hierarchical Models recommends
a logit transformation of the binomial proportion. You attach a normal
prior to these logits. The mean of the normal prior is assumed to be
normal(0, 100) and the standard deviation is assumed to be uniform(0.01,
10).

Nicky Best, Alexina Mason and Philip Li, Bayesian Hierarchical Modelling
using WinBUGS, February 17-18, 2011 recommends a logit transformation of
the binomial proportion. You place a wide uniform distribution on the
mean of the normal distribution (e.g., U(-100, 100)) or a normal
distribution with very large variance. The distribution that you place
on the variance or standard deviation of the normal distribution is
tricky. They consider gamma priors for the reciprocal of the variance, a
uniform(0, 100) distribution for the variance, a uniform(0,100)
distribution for the standard deviation (not recommended, they say), and
a half normal distribution with mean zero and variance 0.4\^2 for the
standard deviation.

Are you confused yet? The good news is that you have some latitude in
making choices that fit your individual needs. The bad news is that when
you try to publish, the peer reviewers are going to make you change your
prior choice to the one they like best, and there's no way of predicting
what their choice will be.

I should read some of the books in my library and check out some
peer-reviewed references.
:::

