---
title: Conflict of Interest
author: Steve Simon
date: 2004-02-25
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Conflict of interest
output: html_document
page_update: partial
---
The New York Review of Books has a [extensive
review](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/16954) written by Richard Horton
of the book *Science in the Private Interest: Has the Lure of Profits
Corrupted Biomedical Research?* by Sheldon Krimsky. The review has an
extensive bibliography, and cites some good work about problems with the
quality and conclusions of corporate sponsored research.

For example, Stelfox showed in a 1998 NEJM article
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=9420342&dopt=Abstract)
that conclusions drawn by authors about calcium channel blockers were
strongly associated with the funding support the authors received. Bero
showed in a 1992 NEJM article
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=1528209&dopt=Abstract)
that journal supplements for symposiums were more likely to have
misleading titles, more likely to use brand names, and less likely to
have peer review if the symposium was sponsored by a single company.
Rochon showed in a 1994 Arch Intern Med article
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=8285810&dopt=Abstract)
that manufacturer supported trials of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs were never critical and showed either comparability (71% of the
time) or superiority (29% of the time) to the comparison drug. These
trials also claimed less toxicity relative to the comparison drug in 86%
of the publications.

Not cited in the review is the substantial evidence that association
with tobacco interests has a large and quantifiable impact on the
findings of a study. An article by Barnes published in 1998 in JAMA
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=9605902&dopt=Abstract)
that showed articles on passive smoking written by authors affiliated
with the tobacco industry were far more likely to conclude that passive
smoking was not harmful. Another article by Barnes, published in 1997 in
Tob Control
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=9176982&dopt=Abstract),
showed, interestingly enough, that tobacco industry affiliation was not
associated with lower quality, but that symposium articles in general
had poorer quality scores than peer-reviewed articles. A review of
studies on the economic effects of laws restricting smoking by Scollo
2003 BMJ Tob Control
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=12612356&dopt=Abstract)
showed that tobacco affiliations were associated with greater use of
subjective outcomes, a lower rate of peer review, and a greater tendency
to report negative economic impacts.

An article by Angell in NEJM
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=8793932&dopt=Abstract)
noted the special problems that conflict of interest poses for the
authors of editorials, which heavily lean on subjective assessments of
evidence.

A1986 review by Davidson in 1986 in J Gen Intern Med
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=3772583&dopt=Abstract)
showed that source of funding was indeed related to the conclusion drawn
by the author as does Kjaergard in a 2002 BMJ article
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=12153921&dopt=Abstract).
Friedberg notes in a 1999 JAMA article
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=10535436&dopt=Abstract)
that funding source does not lead to unwarranted positive conclusions in
economic analyses of new drugs but that authors with industry support as
less likely to draw unfavorable conclusions about the drug being
studied. A systematic review by Lexchin, in a 2003 BMJ article
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=12775614&dopt=Abstract)
shows problems with industry sponsored research. Possible explanations
are publication bias or the use of an ineffective comparator drug. On
the other hand, Clifford noted in a 2002 article in BMC Health Services
Research article
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=12213183&dopt=Abstract)
that a recent sample of randomized trials in five high impact journals
showed no association between funding source and either quality or the
conclusions drawn.

All of us will admit that conflicts of interest can influence other
people's judgments, but as Boyd points out in a 2003 article in Acad
Med
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=12915362&dopt=Abstract),
we as individuals stubbornly cling to the belief that we can rise above
the potential conflict. This is not unlike the belief mentioned by Katz
in 2003 in the American Journal of Bioethics
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=14594489&dopt=Abstract)
that physicians are unaffected by the small gifts that drug companies
often use as a marketing tools.

Is there an explicit assurance from the author that the industry support
still allowed the author to independently assess the data and to publish
the results without first getting approval from the sponsor? A
reasonable review period by the sponsor is acceptable as long the final
decision to publish rests with the author and not the sponsor. A [2001
revision to the statement on publication
ethics](http://www.mja.com.au/public/issues/175_06_170901/icmje/icmje.html)
from the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors highlights
how important this assurance is.

Another problem is that authors rarely disclose possible conflicts.
Hussain in the 2001 BMJ
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=11485955&dopt=Abstract)
calculated the rate of disclosure at 1.4% (52 out of 3,642). Not all
authors have a conflict, of course, but the very low rate here makes me
suspicious that most authors with a conflict fail to report it.

The general conclusion I would draw is that a conflict of interest is
not an automatic disqualification, but that you should instead demand a
higher level of evidence. Is the data laid out in such a way to allow
you to make a complete assessment of the quality of the author's
conclusions?

Keep in mind that sometimes the conflict is not in the author of the
study, but in the reader of the study. Lerner in a 2002 Cmaj article
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=11826945&dopt=Abstract),
highlights the controversy over breast self exam. Because the use of
this exam is empowering, because it promotes self care, and because of a
general belief in individual testimonials, many readers have reacted
angrily to reports that use of a breast self-exam has no detectable
impact on mortality. I've already commented on David Sackett's
editorial, "[The arrogance of preventive
medicine](http://www.cmaj.ca/cgi/content/full/167/4/363)" but there is
also a very informative review article by MacCoun in the Annual Review
of Psychology 1998 49:259-287 (available in html format
[here](http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~maccoun/ar_bias.html) or pdf format
[here](http://ist-socrates.berkeley.edu/~maccoun/MacCoun_AnnualReview98.pdf)).
Read MacCoun's article and it will change the way you interpret
research.

There's so much more to talk about: academic-industry partnerships
raise serious issues about the objectivity of academic research. There
are also non-financial conflicts of interest (note Hammerschimdt 1995 J
Lab Clin Med article, When commitments and interests conflict.
"There's probably no greater conflict of interest than an NIH grant".
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=7602234&dopt=Abstract)).
Also, when emotions on an issue run high, claims of conflict of interest
are often wielded as weapons of war. There is also serious bias in the
selection of references in the bibliography of some research articles.

Returning to the original book review, you should note that the author
of the book being reviewed, Sheldon Krimsky, has many journal
publications on this topic and much of this material is available on the
web in pdf format.

**Conflict of interest and cost-effectiveness analysis.** S. Krimsky.
Jama 1999: 282(15); 1474-5.
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=10535440&dopt=Abstract)
[\[PDF\]](http://www.tufts.edu/~skrimsky/PDF/psychotherapy.PDF)

**Journal Policies on Conflict of Interest: If this Is the Therapy,
What's the Disease?** Sheldon Krimsky. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics
2001: 70155-117.
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=11340412&dopt=Abstract)
[\[PDF\]](http://www.tufts.edu/~skrimsky/PDF/psychotherapy.PDF)

**Financial interests of authors in scientific journals: a pilot study
of 14 publications.** S. Krimsky, L. S. Rothenberg, P. Stott, G. Kyle.
Sci Eng Ethics 1996: 2(4); 395-410.
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=11657729&dopt=Abstract)
[\[PDF\]](http://www.tufts.edu/~skrimsky/PDF/pilot14.PDF)

**Scientific journals and their authors' financial interests: a pilot
study.** S. Krimsky, L. S. Rothenberg, P. Stott, G. Kyle. Psychother
Psychosom 1998: 67(4-5); 194-201.
[\[Medline\]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=9693346&dopt=Abstract)
[\[PDF\]](http://www.tufts.edu/~skrimsky/PDF/sci_fin.PDF)

You can find an [earlier version](http://www.pmean.com/04/conflict.html) of this page on my [original website](http://www.pmean.com/original_site.html).
