---
title: Entrenched beliefs
author: Steve Simon
date: 2004-12-01
category:
- Blog post
tags:
- Critical appraisal
output: html_document
---
A member of the [Evidence Based Health
listserv](http://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/lists/evidence-based-health.html)
wrote about a workshop he taught on Evidence Based Medicine (EBM). It
went pretty well, he thought until he overheard a conversation during
one of the breaks. A doctor was recommending an [herbal
remedy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herbalism) to a friend with the
comment: \"It cleared my problem up really quickly.\" This demonstrated
to him how readily we still accept [anecdotal
evidence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anecdotal_evidence) instead of
EBM.

I think it is just a fundamental characteristic of human nature to apply
[critical thinking
skills](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_thinking) to everything
except a core set of beliefs that you hold near and dear to your heart.

Martin Gardner wrote a book \"Fads and Fallacies in the Name of
Science\" [\[BookFinder4U
link\]](http://www.bookfinder4u.com/detail/0486203948.html) that talked
about bizarre beliefs such as the [earth being
hollow](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hollow_earth), [flying
saucers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flying_saucers),
[Velikovsky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immanuel_Velikovsky), etc. and
how passionately these beliefs are held by certain groups of people. He
reports that he got a lot of letters back complimenting him on the great
book and saying how he really outlined some very silly beliefs \...
except for the chapter on \[whatever\]. The person would then explain
how this belief really was obvious to anyone who had a bit of common
sense.

One recent example springs to mind. A single study appeared showing a
temporary increase in IQ among students listening to Mozart. Classical
music lovers seized on this study and started lobbying for more music in
the schools and marketing music CDs to turn your children into geniuses.
There are lots of good reasons to encourage children to listen to
Mozart, but we can\'t pretend that raising their IQs is one of them.

Now I count myself among those who love classical music, but I am
surprised at how incautiously people embrace preliminary research that
really needs careful replication before you take any serious action on
these studies.

Perhaps the Mozart effect exists (though recent evidence seems to
indicate not). Perhaps the herbal remedy really works (some herbal
remedies have been shown to work well in randomized trials, others have
been shown to do no better than
[placebo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Placebo_effect)). But too many of
us give a \"free pass\" to beliefs that are deeply entrenched in our
souls.

If you are interested in this tendency, there is a wonderful review
article by Robert MacCoun that has some very good examples of entrenched
beliefs and our unwillingness to critically examine them (as well as our
tendency to be overly critical of research that supports conclusions we
fundamentally dislike).

**Biases in the interpretation and use of research results.** MacCoun R.
Annu Rev Psychol 1998: 49; 259-87. [\[Full
text\]](http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~maccoun/ar_bias.html)
[\[PDF\]](http://ist-socrates.berkeley.edu/~maccoun/MacCoun_AnnualReview98.pdf)

**The Mystery of the Mozart Effect: Failure to Replicate.** Stelle KM,
Bass KE, Crook MD. Psychological Science 1999: 10(4); 366-369.
[\[PDF\]](http://www.acs.appstate.edu/dept/psych/Documents/Mozart_PS.pdf)

**[The Mozart Effect](http://skepdic.com/mozart.html)**. Carroll RT, The
Skeptic\'s Dictionary. Accessed on 2003-06-09. skepdic.com/mozart.html

You can find an [earlier version](http://www.pmean.com/04/EntrenchedBeliefs.html) of this page on my [original website](http://www.pmean.com/original_site.html).
