---
title: Provisional means algorithm
author: Steve Simon
date: 2004-07-09
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Statistical computing
output: html_document
---
One of the new fellows asked me about a data summary for two groups of
patients. The ages were quite different, the mean age was 4.6 years in
the exposure group and 8.5 years in the control group. But the control
group happened to include a 21 year old patient (a bit of an outlier
in a pediatric hospital). In the treatment group, the oldest patient
was 10 years old.

To what extent is the outlier influencing the difference in average
ages? That's a bit hard to say, but one hint that it was not a major
influence was the fact that the medians also showed a large disparity
(4.5 for the exposure group versus 7.8 for the control group). The
median is not influenced by outliers, so a discrepancy here indicates
that the discrepancy in ages would probably persist if you ignored the
outlier.

I did not have the original data from this study, but there is a cute
trick that allows you to remove a single data point from your summary
calculations. It relies on an algorithm for the mean and variance
calculations known as the provisional means algorithm. This algorithm
updates the mean and variance as each new point in the data set
appears. From a computational viewpoint, it is fast because it allows
you to compute the mean and variance with a single pass through the
data. The alternative algorithms either require two passes through the
data or have problems with numerical stability.

Here's the algorithm for updating the mean. The formulas here should
appeal to your general intuition.

![provMeans1.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/04/ProvisionalMeans01.png)

Notice that the average at each step is a weighted sum of the new
value and the mean from the previous step. The formula for the
variance is a bit less intuitive, but it follows the same general
pattern.

![provMeans2.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/04/ProvisionalMeans02.png)

The formulas here are slightly modified from the provisional means
algorithm. The actual algorithm uses the sums of squares rather than
the variance for the intermediate calculations to save a bit more in
computational effort. The standard deviaiton, of course, is just the
square root of the variance.

You can run this formula in reverse to remove an individual data point
from the summary statistics. Let's look at an example from my
[standard deviation web
page](www.childrensmercy.org/definitions/stdev.htm). The data for this
example is 73, 58, 67, 93, 33, 18, and 147. You can compute the mean
and standard deviation to get 69.9 and 42.2. The variance is 1780.84.
How would these numbers change if the last value were removed from the
data? Here's the calculation for the mean:

![provMeans3.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/04/ProvisionalMeans03.png)

and for the variance and standard deviation:

![provMeans4.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/04/ProvisionalMeans04.png)

When the largest value is removed from this data set, the mean
decrease by about 20% and the standard deviation is reduced by about a
third.

Of course, you shouldn't willy-nilly toss out any values just because
they look bad. As a general rule, you should not remove outliers
unless you have a good medical or scientific reason to do so. Never
remove an outlier on the basis of statistics alone.

You can find an [earlier version](http://www.pmean.com/04/ProvisionalMeans.html) of this page on my [original website](http://www.pmean.com/original_site.html).
