---
title: Statalist
author: Steve Simon
date: 2004-07-29
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Statistical computing
output: html_document
---
I recently upgraded to version 8 of Stata, which is a nice program for
advanced statistical analyses. During the registration of the software,
the program asked me if I wanted to join Statalist, which is a listserv
for discussion about Stata.

A listserv is an email discussion group that you subscribe to. People
pose questions, these questions are distributed to all subscribers. If
someone knows the answer, they will post a response to all subscribers.
Sometimes a lively debate will ensue.

Listservs are very educational as long as you have the tolearance for
the large amount of email that they generate. I belong to several
listservs and to help keep my sanity, I place all of this email in a
special folder so it doesn\'t get mixed in with more important stuff.

There is a nice [FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) about
Statalist](http://www.stata.com/support/faqs/res/statalist.html). This
FAQ provides some general advice about listservs in general. A few
interesting resources that they cite are worth mentioning.

First, there is a [general protocol that you should follow when asking
questions on a
listserv](http://www.catb.org/~esr/faqs/smart-questions.html). The
people who provide answers on a listserv do this without any financial
compensation. They do this because they want to pay something back to
the community that helped them get started and they appreciate the
technical challenge of the questions being asked. Ask politely, be
specific, and don\'t ask a question that has an answer you can easily
find on your own.

Most email programs now offer fancy formatted versions for their email.
These emails have different names, such as MIME, RTF, or HTML. It is a
[bad idea to send email to a listserv in this
format](http://expita.com/nomime.html). It takes up a lot of space, it
is hard to read on certain systems, it can spread viruses. If your
system sends email in MIME, RTF, or HTML format automatically, there are
ways to turn this off.

I also learned about [Web
Bugs](http://www.eff.org/Privacy/Marketing/web_bug.html), little images
inserted onto web pages and into email that can track who is reading
what. This is a tool commonly used by unscrupulous commercial merchants.
One reason to avoid HTML formatted messages is because they can include
Web Bugs that can make you the target of spammers.

Listservs are great, but you need to know what you are doing when you
subscribe to them.

You can find an [earlier version](http://www.pmean.com/04/stata.html) of this page on my [original website](http://www.pmean.com/original_site.html).
