---
title: "PMean: Using statistical design principles to plan a Monte Carlo analysis -- part 2"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/design-monte-carlo-2/"
date: "2014-04-14"
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Statistical computing
output: html_document
---

I've been working more on a Monte Carlo study of various Bayesian
estimators and it makes me think about certain principles that we
statisticians use in experimental design that could help us not just
with other people's laboratory studies, but with Monte Carlo studies,
which are our own laboratories. This is a continuation of [an earlier
blog post](../design-monte-carlo/index.html). One important principle is
variable transformation. We almost always conceptualize and analyze
proportions using the logit transformation, and this transformation can
help a lot with Monte Carlo studies as well.

<!---More--->

Consider a study of the relationship between sample size, alternative
hypotheses, Type I error rates, and Type II error rates (or equivalently
power). These relationships often appear as non-linear, and you have to
work a lot harder to fully characterize a non-linear function. In
particular, you will often encounter floor effects and ceiling effects
that make it harder to distinguish among different statistical
estimates.

The logit transformation is useful because it tends to spread out the
distances between values close to 0 and can avoid some of the floor
effects. Likewise, it tends to spread out the distances between values
close to 1 and this helps avoid ceiling effects.

Consider a common topic for Monte Carlo studies, examining the coverage
probabilities of a confidence interval. Normally you would use the
classic 95% confidence interval, and when the coverage probability drops
to 82.6%, you characterize this as a "big" effect. It is indeed a big
effect, and represents a four fold change in the odds of coverage
probability. But what about when the coverage probability goes from 95%
to 98.7%? This seems like a small change, but it also represents a four
fold change in the odds of coverage probability. A coverage probability
of 98.3% is just as extreme on the conservative end as a 82.6% coverage
probability is on liberal end, but the former doesn't seem as extreme
because of the ceiling effect.

Perhaps ultra-conservative intervals are less troublesome than
ultra-liberal intervals. Perhaps not. The point is that you shouldn't
let a ceiling effect mask the effect on the conservative side only.

Now suppose you want to examine, as you should, the coverage
probabilities, not just for an interval that claims to be 95% confident,
but one that claims to be 99% or 90% confident or 80% confident. The
ceiling effect is much more severe at numbers that hover around 99% than
for numbers that hover around 80%. So your graphs will be distorted and
you are likely to introduce some interactive effects that are difficult
to interpret.

The logit transformation is a nice way to avoid these problems. Some
people are uncomfortable with odds, and a possible alternative might be
to model not the coverage probability but the coverage failure rate.
This puts the values close to zero rather than close to one, and a
simple log transformation of the coverage failure rate will have much
the same benefit as the logit transformation would.

Monte Carlo simulation of power is another area where the logit
transformation can help a lot. Logits tend to linearize relationships.
Consider the relationship between magnitude of the deviation under the
alternative hypothesis and power. Larger alternatives lead to greater
power of course. Here's an example, using the pwr library in R. I'm
inlcuding the R code, for those who are curious, but you don't need to
follow the R code to follow the argument.

    library("pwr")
    pow1 <- power.prop.test(n=50, p1=0.5, p2=(51:99)/100, sig.level=0.05)
    plot(pow1p2,pow1$power)

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/14/design-monte-carlo-201.png)



This plot shows the power for testing a test of two proportions. The
alpha level is set by default at 0.05, and the sample size is set to 50
per group. The true population proportions are set at 0.5 for the first
group and 0.51 through 0.99 for the second group. The plot shows a
distinctly non-linear pattern. Now, look at the plot where both axes are
transformed by the logit function.

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/14/design-monte-carlo-202.png)



The plot is not perfectly linear, but it is close. You should transform
the axes back to the original scale for interpretability.

    par(las=2)
    plot(logit(pow1p2,base=2), logit(pow1$power,base=2), axes=FALSE,
      xlab="Alternative", ylab="Power")
    yvals <- c(0.02,0.05,0.10,0.25,0.5,0.75,0.9,0.95,0.99,0.999,0.9999)
    axis(side=2, at=logit(yvals,base=2), labels=paste(100*yvals,"%",sep=""))
    xvals=c(0.5,0.6,0.7,0.8,0.9,0.95,0.97,0.99)
    axis(side=1, at=logit(xvals,base=2), labels=paste(100*xvals,"%",sep=""))

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/14/design-monte-carlo-203.png)



There is no real reason to run a Monte Carlo study, of course, for
simple power calculations like this. The reason to show this example is
to demonstrate how the logit transformation simplifies the graphical
presentation of Monte Carlo results.


