---
title: "PMean: History of R"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/history-of-r/"
date: "2014-05-30"
category: Blog post
tags: R software
output: html_document
---

I'm helping to put together three separate classes, Basic data
management and analysis with R \[SAS / SPSS\]. As part of these classes,
I need to discuss the history of these programs, because understanding
that history will help you better understand the strengths and
weaknesses of each statistical package. Here's a brief history of
R.

<!---More--->

R has its roots in a program called S. S was developed in a time when
single letters were in vogue (as in the C programming language). The
author of S, John Chambers, was a statistician at Bell Laboratories
wrote several versions in the 1970s through the 1990s. This packages was
intended for internal research use, but the code was freely available to
anyone who was interested.

Two unique features of the S programming language were the use of
functions rather than macros for extending the language and the
introduction of object oriented features (classes, objects, and
methods).

A nice history of the development of S was written by John Chambers and
is available at
[http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/departments/sia/S/history.html.](http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/departments/sia/S/history.html)

A commercial adaptation of S was introduced by Statistical Sciences
Corporation in the 1990s and became very popular. Through various
mergers and buyouts, S+ has been marketed by Mathsoft, Insightful
Software, and more recently Tibco Corporation.

About the same time,<U+00A0> Ross Ihaka and Robert Gentleman started an effort
to produce an open source and freely distributed version of S, called R.
Their publication:

Ross Ihaka and Robert Gentleman. R: A language for data analysis and
graphics. *Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics*,
5(3):299-314, 1996. Available at
<https://www.stat.auckland.ac.nz/~ihaka/downloads/R-paper.pdf>

outlined the features of the R programming language. The first major
release of R (version 1.0.0) appeared in 2000. Soon R eclipsed S+ in
popularity. One measure of the breadth of R's impact was a New York
Times article published in 2009.

Vance, Ashlee. Data Analysts Captivated by R's Power. The New York
Times, 2009 (January 6). Available at
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/07/technology/business-computing/07program.html>.

There is a non-profit group, the R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
that coordinates many of the efforts in the maintenance and development
of the R programming language. Several commercial companies have
piggybacked on R, including Revolution Analytics, which sells an
enhanced version of R with capabilities for handling very large data
sets.

One of the most popular features of R is the ease with which outside
developers can extend the R language through libraries. Most of these
libraries are available for free under and open source license at the
Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN, available at various sites,
including <http://cran.us.r-project.org/>). You can also find a major
effort to develop freely available libraries for statistical analysis of
genetic data through the Bioconductor project, available at
<http://www.bioconductor.org/>.

R is an interactive programming language, but menu driven versions of R
are available. The most notable of these is R Commander, available at
<http://socserv.mcmaster.ca/jfox/Misc/Rcmdr/>.

Update (August 19, 2014). The Revolutions Analytic blog posted a [nice
summary of a John Chambers talk on the history of S at the Use R! 2014
conference](http://blog.revolutionanalytics.com/2014/07/reflections-on-john-chambers-userr-2014-keynote-address.html).
That article has links to the [slides (PDF format) of a 2006 talk (again
on the history of S) by John
Chambers](http://www.r-project.org/user-2006/Slides/Chambers.pdf), a
[video interview of John Chambers by Trevor
Hastie](http://blog.revolutionanalytics.com/2014/01/john-chambers-recounts-the-history-of-s-and-r.html),
and a [1998 paper (PDF format) by Ross Ihaka on the past (!) and future
of R presented at the Interface
conference](https://www.stat.auckland.ac.nz/~ihaka/downloads/Interface98.pdf).




