---
title: "Adapt the personal statement on your biosketch to the specific grant"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/personal-statement/"
date: "2014-06-28"
category: Blog post
tags:
- Grant writing
output: html_document
page_update: partial
---

When you are asked to prepare a biosketch for a research grant, you
should adapt the personal statement of the biosketch to highlight the
specific skills that you have that would be needed for this grant. This
is the wrong time to be bashful. Find anything that you can brag about
that would be relevant. 

<!---More--->

For most of the grants I am on, the only thing worth highlighting is my
experience in statistical consulting and my track record of
peer-reviewed publication, so I really don't change the personal
statement all that much. I might add a sentence or two about how many of
my consulting projects or publications have specialized in X, where X is
the medical specialty or discipline associated with that grant.
Recently, though, I had to submit a grant where I needed to emphasize
things beyond just my statistical consulting skills. This included (1)
my knowledge and bakground in the ethical conduct of research, (2) my
familiarity with a particular statistical methodology, and (3) my skills
in programming. Here's what I wrote:

As a statistical consultant with over 30 years of experience, I
fervently believe that statisticians play one of the most important
roles in insuring the ethical conduct of research. We consultants are
often the first ones to discuss with the researcher pivotal issues in
research that are fundamental in the careful balance between the needs
of the scientists and the respect for the human volunteers who will
participate in the research. This belief has been reflected in all of my
work experiences, as well. In my twelve years as a statistical
consultant at Children's Mercy Hospital, I worked closely with their
Institutional Review Board (IRB) to develop and teach continuing
education classes on the ethical conduct of research. I also served for
six years as vice chairman for an executive committee at Kansas
University Medical Center that provided oversight for every Data Safety
and Monitoring Board that was needed for research. At my current job at
the University of Missouri-Kansas City, I assisted with the overhaul of
the Responsible Conduct of Research class and have provided several
guest lectures. I write regularly about ethical issues associated with
statistical design issues for my website (www.pmean.com) and blog
(blog.pmean.com).



As a consultant, I was so often asked to assist with decisions to close
down studies because of delays in accrual that I decided to make this a
research interest of mine. I conducted an audit of records at the
Children's Mercy IRB that quantified serious problems with failure to
define accrual targets and the inability of more than 50% of those
studies to meet the target enrollment figures. When I presented some of
my preliminary thoughts on how to monitor accrual at the Biostatistics
Journal Club at Kansas University Medical Center, Byron Gajewski
suggested a Bayesian approach. The resulting collaboration has led to a
series of publications and has attracted the interest and support of the
University of Kansas Cancer Center.

I have an outstanding track record in dissemination of research results.
I have over 80 peer reviewed publications, three of which have won
awards. I have published a book about the statistical aspects of
Evidence-Based Medicine and have a contract to produce a second book. I
am the author of a website (www.pmean.com) with over 1,700 pages about
Statistics, Evidence-Based Medicine, and research ethics. I also have an
email newsletter about Statistics (The Monthly Mean) with over 500
subscribers.

I also have a strong programming background. I have working knowledge of
almost every major Statistical package, and have published several
articles back in the 1980s evaluating the numerical accuracy of
regression and ANOVA procedures in these packages. I have presented
seminars and taught short courses on programming in SAS, SPSS, and R. I
submitted code in R to a programming contest sponsored by Revolution
Analytics and won an honorable mention in that competition. I am
currently the president of the Kansas City Area R Users group. I have
made many presentations and demonstrations to this group and have also
published many helpful R programming tips and resources on my website
and blog. In August 2013, I attended a half day short course, "Practical
Software Engineering for Statisticians" taught by Murray Stokely of
Google, and gained valuable experience with software development
methodologies (e.g., version control, unit testing), that are vital for
production of software by a research team.

You can find an [earlier version][sim1] of this page on my [blog][sim2].

[sim1]: http://blog.pmean.com/personal-statement/
[sim2]: http://blog.pmean.com