---
title: Finding only the important studies
author: Steve Simon
date: 2008-01-21
category:
- Blog post
tags:
- Systematic overviews
output: html_document
---
Someone wrote into the
[MedStats](../category/InterestingWebsites.html#MeStXx) listserv asking
about a process that they had chosen to select \"important\" articles in
a particular research area. This was, I presume, a qualitative summary
of interesting results in a broad medical area rather than a
quantitative synthesis of all available research addressing a specific
medical treatment. The reason I suspect this is that the person
mentioned that they had used the statistical significance of the studies
as a filter and eliminated any negative studies from further
consideration.

The normal goal in any systematic overview is to find all the available
research, not just the research that meets some statistical criteria. To
select only positive studies in a systematic overview is a guarantee to
get biased results. In fact, the folks who do systematic overviews go to
great lengths to avoid selecting studies with a particular statistical
outcome, going as far as to blind the reviewers as to the results
section while they are determining if a study fits the entry criteria.

If the goal is to identify important findings, then filtering out the
negative results is still bad, as several people had pointed out.
Sometimes the negative studies are very important as well.

So how should you go about identifying important studies. There are
several definitions of important but most of them require human
judgment. One possible quantitative definition would be that a study is
important if a systematic overview without that study reaches a
different conclusion than a systematic overview that includes that
study. In other words, a study that turns the consensus from efficacy to
lack of efficacy would be important (as would be the reverse). By this
definition, a study with statistical significance could be important
(the first definitive proof of a new treatment), or it could be trivial
(yet another study supporting an already accepted new treatment). A
study without statistical significance could be important (the first
real evidence that a well accepted practice might be worthless) or it
could be trivial (yet another nail in the coffin of a treatment that
most people have already abandoned). I mention efficacy here, but you
can substitute safety and get pretty much the same results.

So by that logic, it appears that using ANY filter on statistical
significance is a going to be worthless. Instead, a filtering process
should only incorporate scientific and medical considerations. Possibly
you could include sample size in your filter, since any study with ten
patients total is unlikely to shift the research consensus. You could
also filter out those studies that use surrogate outcomes. Both of these
filters have their own problems, of course, but they are more defensible
that the filter of statistical significance.

You could also use other people\'s judgments as a filter. If it gets
reported in the New York Times, it is probably important. Or you could
see how often the article is blogged. Or you could only include articles
that are published in journals that have an impact factor above a
certain threshold. This also leads to problems with bias, most notably
an English language bias, but you can still mount a defense of these
approaches.

I suspect, though, that there is no automated way to screen out
unimportant studies from important studies, other than reading all the
papers and making a subjective judgment yourself.

You can find an [earlier version](http://www.pmean.com/08/ImportantStudies.html) of this page on my [original website](http://www.pmean.com/original_site.html).
