---
title: The post-modern assault on evidence-based medicine, part 3
author: Steve Simon
date: 2008-01-07
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Critical appraisal
output: html_document
---
I have volunteered to give a talk for a group of statisticians which
discusses an article I am preparing: \"The post-modern assault on
evidence-based medicine.\" I might give this talk on the first Monday in
February or the first Monday in March. Here is a tentative abstract.

\"Evidence Based Medicine (EBM) is the integration of best research
evidence with clinical expertise and patient values. It is thoroughly
rooted in a tradition encourages clinicians to search for and
incorporate empirical data in their daily practice. A recent
philosophical movement, post-modernism, is critical of the belief in
universal truths and argues instead that we humans construct a view of
reality based on our social, political, and historical perspectives. As
such, some post-modern philosophers, writing predominantly for nursing
journals, have produced sharply critical commentaries about EBM, even
comparing it to fascism. In this talk, I will outline the two
philosophies. The post-modern philosophers are correct when they point
out the problems and limitations of empirical data, and we as
statisticians would be wise to acknowledge this when we consult with our
clients. I will also argue, though, that EBM is a transparent and
self-correcting mechanism that is broadly democratic rather than fascist
in its approach. Furthermore, EBM is not limited by our social,
political, and historical perspectives, but actually can help us move
beyond those limitations.\"

I\'m hoping to get some feedback that will help me write a better
article. Previous weblog entries on this topic are

-   [Stats: The post-modern assault on evidence-based medicine (December
    7, 2007)](http://www.childrensmercy.org/stats/weblog2007/PostModernAssault.html)
-   [Stats: The post-modern assault on evidence-based medicine, part 2
    (December
    18, 2007)](http://www.childrensmercy.org/stats/weblog2007/PostModernAssaultPart2.html)

You can find an [earlier version](http://www.pmean.com/08/PostModernAssaultPart3.html) of this page on my [original website](http://www.pmean.com/original_site.html).
