---
title: Too much power and precision?
author: Steve Simon
date: 2008-01-09
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Sample size justification
output: html_document
---
There was a discussion on EDSTAT-L about studies with too much power
and precision. [You can indeed have too much power/precision, and here
is a pragmatic example. I was asked to do an audit of records where we
overbilled. The cost of reviewing all the records was prohibitive. So
my proposal was to randomly select records and then pay back at a rate
corresponding to the upper 95% confidence limit of the average
overbilled amount times the actual number of records where we
overbilled. Equivalently, you could say this product is a confidence
interval on the total overbilling.]{style="color: black"}

The ideal sample size in such a setting is the sample size where the
cost of collecting an additional record outweighs the resulting gain
in precision. Here's a graph showing the gain in precision as we add
an additional observation to the data set, assuming a 95% one sided
confidence interval, a standard deviation of 50, a cost of 100 per
sampled record, and a total population of 500 records.

![](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/08/TooMuchPower-0801.gif)

At about 37 records, the change in precision is about 100. If you
sampled more than this value, you would be spending more on the
additional sampling costs than you would save by reducing the
uncertainty in your estimate.

[From a theoretical perspective, patients who enroll in a clinical
trial are making sacrifices to be part of the trial. At a minimum,
there is an inconvenience factor (a lost Saturday morning when they
could be watching Sponge Bob). Sometimes they will undergo a painful
event, such as a blood draw or a spinal tap. In some clinical trials,
they may endure an increase in risk (hopefully only a minimal risk, of
course). It is unfair to ask more patients to make those sacrifices
than you need to produce reasonable precision for your confidence
interval.]{style="color: black"}

[It gets even more serious when your clinical trial has a placebo arm.
Asking more patients than necessary to take a placebo is a very
serious ethical concern.]{style="color: black"}

[Now if you are talking about a retrospective chart review, the issue
is moot. I don't care if a retrospective chart review has too much
power and precision, because nobody is making extra sacrifices to help
you do your research, other than the poor person who has to review all
those medical charts.]{style="color: black"}

In theory, all sample size justifications are based on economic
considerations. Improvements in precision are worth something to you,
so attach a value to this (not an easy thing to do, but in theory it
can be done). Now tally up all the costs associated with the study:
direct costs to the study budget as well as indirect costs associated
with the inconvenience, pain, etc., that each patient has to endure.
Again this is not an easy thing to do. The optimal sample size is one
where the incremental value of improved precision is offset by the
direct and indirect costs of obtaining an additional patient. No one
does it this way, but they should.

You can find an [earlier version][sim1] of this page on my [original website][sim2].

[sim1]: http://www.pmean.com/08/TooMuchPower.html
[sim2]: http://www.pmean.com/original_site.html
