---
title: "PMean: The problem with incentivizing"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/incentivizing/"
date: "2016-02-23"
category: Blog post
tags: Grant writing
output: html_document
---

I came across a question, "How does your institution incentivize
researchers to write more grants?" that was posted a while ago. I felt
it was too late to respond directly, but I did want to mention something
in my blog about this. "Incentivize" is one of those awful words that
used to be a noun (incentive) but has been changed to a verb to make it
sound more trendy. That's something to dislike from the very start, but
I have an even greater gripe about incentivizing.

<!---More--->

The problem with incentives has been long documented in the literature.
Alfie Kohn summarized much of this in a 1995 book, Punished by Rewards:
The Trouble with Gold Stars, Incentive Plans, A's, Praise and Other
Bribes. There's a newer book out (2011) that I have not read yet that
has much the same message: Daniel Pink's Drive: The Surprising Truth
About What Motivates Us.

The problem with incentives and other rewards is not that they never
work. They do work in some settings, and getting the pay structure wrong
is a motivational disaster. The problem with incentives is that they
don't seem to help much with the complex tasks associated today's work,
especially grants. In fact, sometimes the incentives can serve as a
distraction and cause a decline in productivity.

So what do you do if incentives don't work. Dr. Kohn suggests that the
three keys are collaboration, content, and choice. People enjoy work
that is collaborative, so try to work on encouraging teamwork rather
than rewarding individual performance. People also enjoy work that they
perceive as meaningful, so make sure they understand how the type of
work they do relates to making the organization better. Finally, give
people, to the greatest extent possible, the ability to choose how they
approach their work.

Daniel Pink has a similar message: you should stress

> "autonomy-the desire to direct our own lives, mastery-the urge to get
> better and better at something that matters, purpose-the yearning to
> do what we do in the service of something larger than ourselves."

I hesitate to summarize more of Mr. Pink's book based on just a few
excerpts and an interview on NPR, but it sure sounds a lot like what Dr.
Kohn is saying.

I'd like to add one more thing to the list. Often the problems in a
workplace is that there are too few incentives. For grant writing, there
are already lots of incentives in place. The problem is that there are
too many **dis**incentives. If you are in charge of an organization,
look carefully at all the roadblocks, hurdles, and impediments that
keeping people from writing more grants. Do your best to remove all
these disincentives before you plan to add new incentives.

So what are the disincentives to writing research grants? It depends a
lot on the organization, but many of us do not know how to write well.
So access to training is important.

Another problem is the administrative barriers to cross administrative
lines. I've done a lot of research with people from Kansas University
Medical Center, which is just a short drive from the University of
Missouri-Kansas City, but sometimes it feels like the two institutions
are worlds apart. Part of it is the state line the you have to cross to
get from one place to the other, but part of it is just the tendency of
any organization to think about issues from an institutional perspective
rather than a broader perspective.

Finally, there are lots of rules and regulations that make little sense
other than to serve as barriers to conducting research. One regulation
that I find troubling is that many of the grant opportunities are
unavailable to part-time employees. You can try to make a
rationalization for this restriction, but it really just is a way of
punishing those of us who need the flexibility of part-time work because
of child care issues.

Now, the problems with disincentives to producing research are not just
at my organization. It's a problem at every place I've ever worked and
I'm guessing it is more or less a universal problem. But if someone at
UMKC asked me "How can we get more research done here?" my response
would be "Stop punishing your successful researchers." It's a bit harsh
but it would get the people in power, I hope, to start thinking about
all the disincentives that are already in place.

One issue that Mr. Pink brought out in his NPR interview is that
organizations look at incentive programs as a way to solve their
problems because they are easy to implement. It's the easiest thing in
the world to throw money at a problem to try to solve it. But giving
people autonomy is hard work. Showing that the work that your employees
do has a bigger purpose is even more difficult. But if you want to be
successful in getting your organization to do something important, you
have to do the hard work.


