---
title: "PMean: Calculating power for a test of association in a two by two table"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/power-for-two-by-two-table/"
date: "2016-02-05"
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Sample size
output: html_document
---

A colleague was curious to see the formulas behind the power
calculations done by many statistical software programs and online
calculators. In particular, she wanted to see the formula used for power
of the Chi-squared test of association in a two dimensional contingency
table. It gets pretty messy for anything larger than a two by two table,
but even a two by two table is a bit tricky. Here ins one mathematical
approach that you can choose for a power calculation.

<!---More--->

The approach that I most often take with power calculation for a test of
association for a two by two table is to treat it as a test of two
independent proportions. Here's an example. You are collecting data on
the proportion of women who are still successfully breast feed their
newborn child at six months of age. The child is six months old, not the
mother. The mothers are randomly assigned to either a treatment group
that receives special counseling or a control group. Both groups of
mothers are encouraged to breast feed, but the treatment group has a
more intensive intervention. The latest statistics seem to indicate that
the probability of breast feeding at six months for the typical mother
in the United States is around 50%. The number is much lower if you look
at exclusive breastfeeding at six months.

The intervention is expensive and would only be worth adopting if the
rate of breast feeding increased from 50% to 60%. You want to sample a
total of 300 mothers, with twice as many assigned to the treatment group
than the control group. Normally this is a bit inefficient, but there
are other objectives of the research that require a larger number of
women in the treatment group.

Here's what the two by two table would look like under the ideal setting
of no sampling error

.

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/16/power-for-two-by-two-table01.gif)


height="120"}

You want to test the hypothesis that the proportion of mothers breast
feeding at six months is equal in the treatment and control groups. You
plan to test this hypothesis using a two-sided test with an alpha level
of 0.05.

Under the null hypothesis, the test statistic,

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/16/power-for-two-by-two-table02.gif)


height="90"}

is approximately a normal distribution with mean zero and standard
deviation 1 where

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/16/power-for-two-by-two-table03.gif)


height="57"}

is the estimate of the proportion pooled across both groups. If the
alternative hypothesis is true, then test statistic is approximately
normal, but the mean is

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/16/power-for-two-by-two-table04.gif)


height="90"}

and the standard deviation is

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/16/power-for-two-by-two-table05.gif)


height="127"}

Notice that the hats disappear in these formulas because we are talking
about population parameters and not statistics.

For a one sided test, the power would be

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/16/power-for-two-by-two-table06.gif)


height="37"}

where Z* is not a standard normal, but rather the normal distribution
described above. to calculate this probability, you need to standardize
by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation.

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/16/power-for-two-by-two-table07.gif)


height="196"}

Eeeek! It does simplify a bit. The left hand side is a now a standard
normal. And you can cancel a few things on the right hand side.

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/16/power-for-two-by-two-table08.gif)


height="94"}

It's still a bit messy but manageable. If you wanted to get a sample
size that provides you with a specific amount of power, you set that
messy thing on the right side of the inequality equal to the 1-beta
percentile of a standard normal distribution and solve for the sample
size. There are actually two sample sizes here, so you need to assume
that the sample sizes of the two groups are equal or perhaps that they
vary in a certain ratio (2 to 1 in the example above). I won't show all
the details, but like everything else here,<U+00A0> it is more tedious than
difficult.

<U+00A0>

<U+00A0>

<U+00A0>


