---
title: Seminar notes. Issues in the analysis of mixed linear models
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/06/MixedSeminar.html
date: 2006-07-17
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Multilevel models
output: html_document
page_update: partial
---
The keynote address at the 18th Annual Applied Statistics in Agriculture
Conference, sponsored by Kansas State University was "Random
Observations with Mixed Feelings", given by Oliver Schabenberger, SAS
Institute Inc. The original title was "Estimating Gene Expression
Profiles Using All Available Information." Here are my notes from that
seminar.

Dr. Schabenberger started with a historical overview. Approximately 25
years ago, the the general linear mixed model was an obscure complicated
mathematical construction that required specialized software that was
utilized by a limited number of statisticians. The times have changed,
but there is still more work that needs to be done.

He noted that the typical users have unreasonable expectations. They
expect that all mixed models make sense, converge, and behave as
expected (that is, behave well). "The pace of mixed model applications
is outrunning knowledge acquisition."

The goal of his talk was to take another look at the mixed model through
the Mixed Model Equations, dispel some myths about mixed models, and
discuss where we are going.

The mixed model equations Y=Xb+Zg+e. The original solution by Henderson
was to minimize a quadratic form. The secret is to understand the lower
right corner of the solution to this quadratic form.

He drew an analogy to a partitioned model with all fixed effects. There
is also an analogy with ridge regression which shrinks the estimates to
control for multicollinearity. The mixed model uses a similar approach,
except that the G matrix is intended not to control for
multicollinearity, but to penalize the fit. The random effects cannot be
allowed to vary at will but they must vary according to the distribution
of the random effects.

If the objective function in statistical estimation is based on a
penalty function, then you can use a mixed model formulation. A good
example of this is a smoothing spline.

Just because you can draw a link, however, between these approaches does
not mean that you should. There are computational efficiency issues,
among other things, that you need to consider.

The concept of a BLUP (Best Linear Unbiased Prediction) has an
interpretation as an Empirical Bayes estimate. Dr. Shabengerger showed a
correspondance between the traditional mixed model equations and the
equations generated by a Bayesian interpretation of the mixed model.

He had a warning "variation does not imply variance" and cited a
dangerous outlook along the lines of "One of the great advantages of
mixed modeling is that you can treat effects as fixed or random
depending on the kind of analysis that you are interested in."

This is a troubling development leads to a "shoot from the hip
approach" such as

-   treating all nested effects are random,
-   declaring effects random because you WANT to draw inferences
    regardless of how the effect came about.
-   equating ignorance with randomness.
-   equating the ability to estimate a variance component as evidence of
    that effect being random.

A dangerous approach is to fit a model in which all effects are random
and then figuring out which ones "stick." Dr. Schabenberger noted that
he hears about this approach because the models that include everything
will fail to converge.

How do you justify random effects in observational studies? Is the
observational study the realization of a stochastic process? If so, it
is random. The crux is: what is the effect representative of?

Myths: residuals in mixed models behave like any residuals do. Reality:
they don't, in part because there are two different types of residuals.

Myth: Leverages are bounded by 1/n and 1. Reality: leverage in mixed
models is not well defined. You can look at the gradient of the fitted
values with respect to y, but this is not symmetric so cannot represent
a projection matrix. You can get negative leverage values. An
interpretation could be made for this quality.

Myth: if you fit a model with spatial correlation, the residuals are
"Purged" of spatial autocorrelation. Reality: the covariance structure
of the model infects the residuals.

Myth: Least Square Means are population means that take into account all
other model effects, both fixed and random. Reality: the Least Squares
means do not involve any function of the random effects. In fact, the
formula for the Least Square Means is identical for a model with random
effects and a model without random effects. The only reason the Least
Square Means differ is that the estimated coefficients change. If your
random effects have non-zero means, you have a very big problem.

He mentioned the use of various information criteria. He cited a famous
story about how the answer to the ultimate question of Life, Universe,
and Truth is 42 (Douglas Adams). You need to look at more than just a
single number. You should examine the pattern of residuals. The use of
an information criteria is especially troublesome with GLMM which use
linearization, and pseudo-likelihood methods. Pseudo-likelihoods are not
comparable across models, even if that are not nested.

He spent a fair amount of time talking about spatial applications. Low
rank spatial smoothing can often reduce a very complex problem to
something that is manageable and that can produce an estimate in
reasonable time.

He also talked about a joint publication with Gilliland in 2001 that
looked at correlated binary variables. I don't have the full details on
this reference, but the title apparently is "Limits on Pairwise
Association for Equi-Correlated Binary Variables" and it appeared in
the Journal of Applied Statistical Sciences. There are serious
constraints on binary variables that prevent many correlation values
from occurring.

Dr. Shabenbarger ended his talk with a summary of unfinished and
unresolved issues:

-   the degrees of freedom issue,
-   diagnostic tests and graphs,
-   non-normal random effects,
-   and mixture models.
