---
title: Randomization tests for paired data
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/06/PairedRandomization.html
date: 2006-01-24
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Unusual data
output: html_document
---
**[StATS]: Randomization tests for paired data
(January 24, 2006)**

The randomization test offers a lot of flexibility for analyzing data in
ways well beyond what traditional tests might offer. The concept is
quite simple. Suppose that you ran a laboratory experiment, but a
mischievous lab technician deliberately mislabeled some of your test
tubes. What you would get would be properly described as "noise" and
the results would be worthless. But in many situations, we are
interested in how much noise there is in a data set and whether our
signal readily exceeds the noise threshold. So you would deliberately
shuffle the labels and analyze the data. Then reshuffle the labels and
analyze again. Repeat this a few hundred or a few thousand times. Now
compare the actual result from the unshuffled data to the results from
the shuffled data. If the actual results lies smack dab in the middle of
the shuffled results, then you are suspect that what you actually
observed could have easily arisen from sampling error. If the actual
result lies outside the shuffled results or very close to the edge of
the shuffled results, then what you actually observed is unlikely to
have appeared just by chance.

An interesting published example of the use of a randomization test
appears in:

-   **Microsatellite diversity and the demographic history of modern
    humans.** Jorde LB, Rogers AR, Bamshad M, Watkins WS, Krakowiak P,
    Sung S, Kere J, Harpending HC. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997: 94(7);
    3100-3.
    [Medline]](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=9096352&dopt=Abstract)
    [Abstract]](http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/94/7/3100)
    [Full text]](http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/94/7/3100)
    [PDF]](http://www.pnas.org/cgi/reprint/94/7/3100.pdf)

Randomization tests should be used with caution, though, because you can
only apply these tests properly when you understand how the data was
collected. A good example involves the use of a randomization test with
paired data. On this page, I want to illustrate how to do a
randomization test properly when you have paired data and why an
improper randomization test leads to a serious loss in precision.

Here's a simple example from the [Chance Data Sets web
page](http://www.dartmouth.edu/~chance/teaching_aids/data.html). It
represents weather predictions by five media outlets in Oklahoma City
compared to the actual results. I will use a small subset of the data
here, the one day forecasts from the fourth media outlet. Their
predictions over a 338 day period were:

`   [1]   46   54   60   52   54   59   46   39      46   33   27   43   50   59   48   54   47   54      [19]   59   64   67   71   62   59   53   43   45   32      63   33   39   78   77   79   60   62     [37]   74   70   72   84   79   86   87   66   77   85      54   62   54   54   53   60   53   70     [55]   78   80   62   72   41   54   64   71   79   56      60   63   84   90   67   79   80   82     [73]   83   82   83   77   64   43   48   61   50   65      71   78   82   62   73   69   76   76     [91]   81   80   76   80   83   81   81   81   79   80      82   84   84   88   78   75   79   80   [109]   87   90   86   92   93   82   82   79   91   91      90   80   90   92   93   88   93   98   [127] 103   96   99   97 102   97   87   86   91   96   99      99   89   85   84   87   89   84   [145]   98   98   98   99   99   99   76   69   81   84      91   76   85   84   82   81   84   85   [163]   87   89   90   83   83   85   82   82   84   87      66   67   67   78   84   84   92   93   [181]   88   87   86   88   85   85   83   71   67   69      68   70   71   75   66   59   68   68   [199]   76   79   77   75   81   76   70   59   61   66      67   65   71   57   69   75   83   55   [217]   55   67   69   78   48   56   57   54   63   56      57   59   63   65   57   61   58   45   [235]   48   49   48   57   56   53   51   56   62   60      61   69   40   64   43   35   43   45   [253]   39   44   42   47   47   54   59   56   63   57      48   50   51   45   56   58   61   50   [271]   46   49   51   35   46   34   30   36   42   41      47   59   57   71   63   55   54   62   [289]   59   51   40   50   56   40   32   38   53   56      50   63   41   36   52   60   71   77   [307]   56   64   49   58   47   46   59   56   36   27      33   37   54   41   55   61   64   73   [325]   70   76   72   63   69   75   59   35   26   24      32   40   42   59`

and the actual temperatures were:

`   [1]   50   46   48   48   52   54   50   40      34   35   29   45   50   46   51   48   46   52     [19]   61   58   61   68   67   56   62   48   43   38      60   50   44   74   74   68   56   53     [37]   77   74   72   82   75   81   75   70   80   80      68   59   59   51   54   56   53   73     [55]   79   65   65   72   54   49   67   67   69   72      68   57   79   81   62   79   86   87     [73]   79   82   87   77   69   58   56   70   60   65      72   84   87   69   74   74   75   82     [91]   80   80   79   86   87   83   83   81   81   83      84   86   86   86   78   77   85   87   [109]   85   93   93   93   94   85   87   87   91   93      94   93   91   93   93   92   92   94   [127]   99   95   99   95   97   97   88   92   94   95      97   96   88   87   86   88   88   88   [145]   96   95   99   98   98   97   87   75   79   85      90   86   84   85   87   88   88   90   [163]   90   89   88   83   82   81   83   83   86   86      69   58   59   72   83   83   83   91   [181]   92   89   84   84   83   82   83   73   64   73      71   70   73   71   72   67   71   75   [199]   72   73   79   79   78   74   73   62   63   71      77   65   61   66   68   78   74   70   [217]   63   71   73   72   58   60   63   66   64   61      55   57   63   59   61   54   60   51   [235]   55   59   56   66   60   50   48   57   67   62      68   71   40   38   49   40   40   43   [253]   42   45   48   45   41   54   58   54   58   55      51   50   58   54   54   54   56   49   [271]   48   48   41   38   43   33   29   32   38   41      56   56   60   66   55   52   56   61   [289]   57   52   42   54   53   41   36   44   56   47      55   56   44   37   46   58   64   69   [307]   56   56   48   55   50   47   50   53   27   28      48   60   54   42   54   67   64   71   [325]   72   73   65   65   72   67   71   46   30   31      36   50   53   60 `

There are several ways to measure the amount of agreement between a
forecast and the actual value, and a simple thing to look for is whether
the media outlet consistently overpredicted or underpredicted the actual
temperature. There is perhaps some evidence for this. The mean estimate
of the media outlet is 67.1 degrees and the average actual temperature
across the same set of days is 66.4 degrees, a difference of 0.7
degrees.

The following graph shows the predictions across the 338 days with over
predictions in red and under predictions in blue. Days where the
prediction was perfect are represented by black dots.

![randomization01.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/06/PairedRandomization01.png)

A simple, but incorrect, application of a randomization test would be to
shuffle the labels so that of the 676 temperatures listed above, 338
would be randomly assigned to the media outlet and the other 338 would
be assigned to the observed temperatures. The problem with this approach
is that one sample might have a few too many winter   values and the
other sample might have a few too many summer values. It unnecessarily
increases the variation in the randomization distribution.

![randomization02.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/06/PairedRandomization02.png)

The picture shown above is what happens when you apply the randomization
procedure incorrectly. Notice that some winter predictions were paired
with summer observed temperatures and vice versa. While it probably does
not affect the number of red or blue arrows, it certainly makes the
deviations much larger than they should be. This leads to an unnecessary
increase in imprecision and a subsequent loss of power.

To insure a proper mix of winter and summer days, a better approach is
to randomly swap about half of the media outlet predictions with the
actual values and to leave the rest unchanged. If the media outlet does
not consistently underpredict or overpredict, then the observed
difference of 0.7 degrees will fall well inside the distribution of
differences in the randomization distribution.

![randomization03.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/06/PairedRandomization03.png)

The picture above shows the better approach to randomization. It has a
pattern that looks a lot like the original data, but if you look
carefully, the colors (and hence the directions) of many of the arrows
have switched. This is especially noticeable on the far right side of
the graph, which was almost all red in the original graph, but which has
a greater mix in the randomization distribution.

Here is the code for running a bad randomization that ignores the
pairing in the data.

`bad.distribution <- rep(-1,1000)   for (i in 1:1000) {     shuffle <- sample(c(media.outlet,observed.tmp))     media.outlet.bad.ran <- shuffle[1:338]     observed.tmp.bad.ran <- shuffle[339:676]     bad.distribution[i] <- mean(media.outlet.bad.ran)-mean(observed.tmp.bad.ran)   }`

Notice the approach: put both sets of data together and shuffle them in
a random order (using the sample function). Then pick the first 338
values for the media.outlet randomizaiton sample and place the remainder
in observed.temperature.

![randomization04.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/06/PairedRandomization04.png)

The results of this randomization appear above. Notice that the observed
difference (0.7 degrees) falls well inside the randomization
distribution. It turns out that 287 of the values in the bad
randomization distribution are larger than 0.7, which would produce a
p-value of 0.564 (you would take 287/1000, but then you have to double
the p-value because it is a two sided test).

The code for using the pairing information in the randomization process
is just a bit more complex.

`good.distribution <- rep(-1,1000)   for (i in 1:1000) {     swap <- (runif(338) > 0.5)     media.outlet.good.ran <- rep(-1,338)     observed.tmp.good.ran <- rep(-1,338)     media.outlet.good.ran[!swap] <- media.outlet[!swap]     media.outlet.good.ran[swap] <- observed.tmp[swap]     observed.tmp.good.ran[!swap] <- observed.tmp[!swap]     observed.tmp.good.ran[swap] <- media.outlet[swap]     good.distribution[i] <- mean(media.outlet.good.ran)-mean(observed.tmp.good.ran)   }`

First you create a swap vector that is true about half of the time. Then
populate the media.outlet randomization scores with media.outlet values
if you do not swap, and with observed.tmp values if you do swap. Reverse
this for the observed.tmp values.

![randomization05.gif not found.](http://www.pmean.com/images/images/06/PairedRandomization05.png)

The distribution of values using the good randomization approach appears
above. This distribution is much more precise because it does not mix
summer predictions with winter observed values. Only 5 values in this
distribution are larger than 0.7, producing a p-value of 0.01.

This general concept can be extended to more complex research designs.
Many research designs have blocking factors, and the trick to performing
a randomization test is to randomly shuffle within the blocks when you
are testing an effect within blocks. For an effect between blocks you
would just randomly shuffle the entire block.

**Further reading in the StATS pages:**

-   [Stats: Randomization test (July
    14, 2004)](http://www.childrensmercy.org/stats/weblog2004/randomization.asp)

**Further reading outside:**

-   **[Randomization Test on Means of Matched
    Pairs](http://www.uvm.edu/~dhowell/StatPages/Resampling/RandomMatchedSample/RandomMatchedSample.html)**.
    Howell DC, The University of Vermont. Accessed on 2006-01-26.
    *[Excerpt] In some ways the randomization test on the means of two
    matched samples is even simpler than the corresponding test on
    independent samples. From the parametric t test on matched samples,
    you should recall that we are concerned primarily with the set of
    difference scores. If the null hypothesis is true, we would expect a
    mean of difference scores to be 0.0. We run our t test by asking if
    the obtained mean difference is significantly greater than 0.0. For
    a randomization test we think of the data just a little differently.
    If the experimental treatment has no effect on performance, then the
    Before score is just as likely to be larger than the After score as
    it is to be smaller. In other words, if the null hypothesis is true,
    a permutation within any pair of scores is as likely as the reverse.
    That simple idea forms the basis of our test.*
    www.uvm.edu/~dhowell/StatPages/Resampling/RandomMatchedSample/RandomMatchedSample.html

This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Unusual
data](../category/UnusualData.html).
<!---More--->
data](../category/UnusualData.html).
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Unusual
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy

<!---Do not use
**[StATS]: Randomization tests for paired data
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Unusual
data](../category/UnusualData.html).
--->

