---
title: Where to go, where to go
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/06/WhereToGo.html
date: 2006-01-11
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Professional details
output: html_document
---
**[StATS]:** **Where to go, where to go (January 11,
2006)**

There are several interesting research conferences this year, and I have
to decide quickly which one(s) to attend.

There is a local conference, the Kansas City Area Life Sciences Research
Day. It will be held on Thursday, March 30 at the Kansas City Convention
Center. The [website for this
conference](http://www.kclifesciencesday.org/index.htm), however, does
not have much information yet.

Another local event is a day long training class, "[Bayesian Clinical
Trials](http://www.amstat.org/education/learnstat/bct.cfm)" taught by
Scott Berry. This class will be held on Friday, April 14 at the Kansas
University Medical Center. The class does not have a lot of
prerequisites, just "a basic understanding of statistics and clinical
trials."

The shortest trip is to the Kansas State University's annual conference
on [Applied Statistics in
Agriculture](http://www.k-state.edu/stats/agstat.conference/). This year
it is being held from April 30 to May 2. The short course on Sunday is
on generalized linear models using SAS software. Every year, this
conference has lessons on country line dancing on Monday night, which is
a lot of fun. The actual talks have not been set yet.

The International Biometric Society has an annual meeting, usually in a
place very exotic and far away. This year, the [XXXIII International
Biometric Conference](http://www.ibc2006.org/e/01-home_e.shtml) will be
held in Montreal, Canada, which is exotic, but not so far away. The
conference is being held from Sunday, July 16 to Friday, July 21 with
Wednesday being deliberately held open for social events, tours, and
informal collaborations.

In North America, the IBS has two regions ENAR (Eastern North American
Region) and WNAR (Western North American Region). The ENAR annual
meeting was moved from New Orleans, LA to Tampa FL because of the damage
from hurricane Katrina. This meeting goes from March 26 to March 29 and
a [prelimary program in PDF
format](http://www.enar.org/2006_prelim_program.pdf) is available.

The WNAR meeting is June 27-30 in Flagstaff, Arizona and a [very brief
(one page) preliminary
program](http://www.wnar.org/Meetings/WNAR%202006/WNAR_IMS_06_RevD_final.pdf)
is available.

The Joint Statistics Meetings are August 5-10 in Seattle, WA. The
American Statistical Association is the main sponsor of this meeting,
but all of the Statistics Societies participate (hence the adjective
"Joint"). An extensive set of web pages about the meetings are at the
ASA web site ([start
here](http://www.amstat.org/meetings/jsm/2006/index.cfm)), but there are
very few details yet. The preliminary program will be available on
May31.

The day prior to the Joint Statistics Meetings (August 4), the
University of Washington is holding a one day conference, Conference on
Statistical Methods for Emerging Issues in Epidemiology and
Observational Studies In Honor of Norman E. Breslow, on the University
of Washington campus in Seattle, WA. The [conference
website](http://www.biostat.washington.edu/breslow-conference-2006/index.html)
lists some very prominent speakers (including Nicholas Day, Raymond,
Carroll, Mitchell Gail, Louise Ryan, and Bradley Efron).

The Twenty-Ninth Annual Midwest Biopharmaceutical Statistics Workshop is
May 22 to May 24 in Muncie Indiana. I have never attended this meeting,
but they always seem to draw a good selection of talks and speakers. The
[web page for this conference](http://www.mbswonline.com/) has not yet
been updated to 2006 and still has details of the 2005 conference.

I have been spending a lot of time with the statistics program R, and
the second annual conference for R (userR 2006) is being held from June
15 to June 17 in Vienna, Austria. The [web page for the userR 2006
conference](http://www.r-project.org/useR-2006/Tutorials/index.html)
lists the keynote lectures, tutorials, and a panel discussion on getting
recognition for excellence in computational statistics.

I'm not sure which of these conferences I will end up attending, but
they all look good.

This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Professional
details](../category/ProfessionalDetails.html).
<!---More--->
details](../category/ProfessionalDetails.html).
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Professional
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy

<!---Do not use
**[StATS]:** **Where to go, where to go (January 11,
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Professional
details](../category/ProfessionalDetails.html).
--->

