---
title: Step-down procedures for multiple comparisons
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/05/MultipleComparisons-05.html
date: 2005-06-16
category: Blog post
tags: 
output: html_document
---
**[StATS]: Step-down procedures for multiple
comparisons (June 16, 2005)**.

In some research studies, you have a large and difficult to manage set
of outcome measures. This is especially true in microarray experiments,
where for thousands or tens of thousands of genes, you are measuring the
difference in expression levels between two types of tissue. A simple
p-value is worthless in this situation, because it will be swamped by
thousands of other p-values.

The simplest (and least effective) adjustment to the p-values is a
Bonferroni correction. It simply multiplies each p-value by the number
of outcome measures. With a thousand genes, it would declare a
difference anytime the unadjusted p-value was less than 0.00005. It\'s
impossible for a p-value to be larger than 1, so any Bonferroni adjusted
p-values larger than 1 are set equal to 1.

You can get a slight improvement in Bonferroni by using a step down
procedure. The Holm step-down procedure is the easiest to understand.
First, sort your thousand p-values from low to high. Multiply the
smallest p-value by one thousand. If that adjusted p-value is less than
0.05, then that gene shows evidence of differential expression.

That\'s no different than the Bonferroni adjustment. But now that we
know that the first gene is differentially expressed, we have 999 genes
for which we are not sure what is going on. So multiply the next
smallest p-value by 999 (not one thousand) and see if it is less than
0.05.

Multiply the third smallest p-value by 998, the fourth smallest by 997,
etc. Compare each of these adjusted p-values to 0.05.

Now that is not quite the Holm step down procedure. One problem that
crops up is that the adjusted p-values may not be in the same order as
the unadjusted p-values. The third p-value was multiplied by 998 and the
fourth by 997. If they were close enough, the order of the adjusted
p-values might be reversed.

To avoid this problem, you should insure that any adjusted p-value is at
least as large as any preceding adjusted p-value. If it is not make sure
it is equal to the largest of the preceding p-values.

Here are the official mathematical details for the Holm step-down
procedure.

Step 1. Sort the p-values from low to high:

> ![](../news/images/201102/02a.gif)

Step 2: Multiply the p-values by K, K-1, K-2,\...

> ![](../news/images/201102/02b.gif)

Step 3: Correct for any p-values out of their proper order.

> ![](../news/images/201102/02c.gif)

Here\'s a small example. Suppose I have ten p-values: 0.0002, 0.0011,
0.0012, 0.0015, 0.0022, 0.0091, 0.0131, 0.0152, 0.0311, and 0.1986.
These are impressively small, even after accounting for the fact that we
have ten of them.

![](../news/images/201102/02d.gif)

Notice that the first part of the Holm adjustment (the fourth column)
leaves a few of the adjusted p-values out of order. The third p-value is
smaller than the second and the eighth p-value is smaller than the
seventh. When you take the maximum of any preceding p-values (the fifth
column), that puts a proper order to the adjusted p-values.

The last column is the Bonferroni adjustment, which simply multiplies
each p-value by 10. Notice that there is a slight difference, since the
Bonferroni adjusted p-value for the sixth row is not statistically
significant, though it is significant using the Holm step-down
procedure.

A better approach than either Bonferroni or the Holm step-down procedure
is to define a false discovery rate and control that value directly
rather than the p-value.

To understand the false discovery rate better, suppose that there are K
genes, that a procedure declared R genes to be statistically significant
and that V of these genes are false positives. Both Bonferroni and the
Holm step-down procedure insure that P\[V\>0\] is no more than alpha. In
a microarray experiment, this is a rather stringent standard. Most
researchers will tolerate a handful of false positive genes. A
microarray experiment is often an exploratory study. Most of the time,
these researchers follow up on any positive findings with additional
testing anyway. So a small number of false positives is tolerable. They
just don\'t want the number of false positives to dominate the list of
statistically significant genes.

Suppose you ran an microarray experiment.with 10,000 genes and the
largest p-value before any adjustment was 0.05. This is like hitting the
lottery jackpot, since every gene is statistically significant. Testing
at an unadjusted alpha level of 0.05 tells you that the expected number
of false positives is 500 (5% of 10,000). That\'s a tolerable number
among 10,000 positive results.

Let\'s suppose though that only half of your genes (5,000) are
statistically significant at an unadjusted alpha level of 0.05. Now the
number of false positives represents 10% of the significant genes. Are
you starting to get a bit worried? Maybe not, but now suppose a quarter
of your genes (2,500)  are statistically significant at an unadjusted
alpha level of 0.05. The expected number of false positives is still
500, but now that represents 20% of the genes, which might make you a
bit uncomfortable. Suppose that 10% of your genes (1,000) are
statistically significant at an alpha level of 0.05. Now the false
positives are going to be half of the positive genes.

So perhaps you should apply a stricter standard when fewer of your genes
are statistically significant. In the last situation, it might make
sense to test at an alpha level that is one-tenth as large (0.005),
because then the expected number of false positives (50) is only 5% of
the total number of genes again.

So to control the false discovery rate, don\'t bother adjusting the
largest p-value, adjust the p-value halfway through the list by doubling
it, adjust the p-value three quarters of the way towards the smallest
p-value by quadrupling it, adjust the p-value nine-tenths of the way
down by multiplying by 10, etc.

Notice that the false discovery rate proceeds in the opposite order from
the Holm adjustment. It looks at the largest p-value first. You need to
insure consistency in the ordering of the false discovery rates, but
here you make sure that the second largest false discovery rate is not
larger than the largest, that the third largest false discovery rate is
not larger than the previous two, etc..

The formal mathematical definition is 

Step 1. Sort the p-values from high to low:

> ![](../news/images/201102/02e.gif)

Step 2. Multiply the p-values by 1, K/(K-1), K/(K-2), \..., K.

> ![](../weblog/images/Holm06.gif)

Step 3. Correct for any p-values out of the proper order.

> ![](../news/images/201102/02g.gif)

Here\'s the same example using the ten p-values discussed above. It
seems a bit silly, perhaps to apply the false discovery rate to such a
small number of p-values, but it does help to illustrate the
calculations.

![](../news/images/201102/02h.gif)

The p-values for the Holm adjustment are listed at the end for
comparison.

The false discovery rate is not a p-value. Instead, think of it as the
proportion of false positive results that you are willing to tolerate
among the results that are flagged.

To understand this better, define R as the number of genes that are
flagged as differentially expressed by a procedure (note that I did not
say the number of genes that are statistically significant). Let V
represent the number of false positives among those R genes. I\'m using
the notation which appears in the book

-   Amaratunga and Cabrerea, **Exploration and Analysis of DNA
    Microarray and Protein Array Data**.

The Bonferroni approach (and the Holm adjustment) control the familywise
error rate, which is defined as

![](../news/images/201102/02i.gif)

This is saying that even a single false positive is intolerable and you
must control this scrupulously. For a microarray experiment, this may be
too strict. Instead you should focus on the ratio of false positives,
V/R. A formal mathematical definition here is a bit tricky, because we
can\'t allow even a small probability that the denominator is zero. It
turns out that the false discovery rate is equal to

![](../news/images/201102/02j.gif)

Once you let go of the concepts of p-values, then you can drop the
dogmatic insistence on an alpha level of 0.05 as well.

How many false positives can you tolerate in a sample of genes that are
flagged as differentially expressed? In many situations, I suspect that
your tolerance would be fairly high maybe 10% or 20%. Amaratunga and
Cabrera suggest that in some situations, a false discovery rate of 50%
might still be tolerable.

Think carefully about this choice. What is the cost of a false positive?
In a microarray experiment, it means tracking down a lead that ends up
being a dead end. This is not a trivial cost, but your perspective here
is quite different than testing a new drug, for example. There, a false
positive means allowing an ineffective drug onto the market.

This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children\'s Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at
<!---More--->
for pages similar to this one at
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
Children\'s Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy

<!---Do not use
**[StATS]: Step-down procedures for multiple
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children\'s Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at
--->

