---
title: What is critical thinking?
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/05/CriticalThinking.html
date: 2005-05-17
category: Blog post
tags: Critical appraisal
output: html_document
---
**[StATS]:** **What is critical thinking? (created
2005-05-17)**.

A lot of people use the term \"critical thinking\" in an offhand way.
Usually the writer who uses this term is trying to imply that anyone who
disagrees with the writer\'s theory or belief is naive. Critical
thinking is also produced as an excuse to attack a particular theory or
to promote \"equal time\" for a competing belief.

Critical thinking, however, is much more complex than this. It involves
more than just fault finding. After all, no theory is perfect and
unflawed. Rather it looks at the evidence supporting a theory in
addition to the critical evidence. It evaluates the quality of these
arguments rather than the quantity. Nit pickers will always find
hundreds of little things to complain about, but a critical thinker will
brush aside trivial concerns about a theory if other supporting evidence
for that theory is strong.

A perfect example of critical thinking versus nit picking is the
developing recognition in the 1950s and 1960s that cigarette smoking
causes cancer. This body of research is summarized well in Gail 1996.
The research studies that identified a link between smoking and cancer
were not perfect. You couldn\'t use randomized trials and you couldn\'t
use blinding and you couldn\'t use a host of other research methods that
would make these studies more rigorous. There were animal studies, but
the nitpickers pointed out that you can\'t always extrapolate from
animals to humans. There were far higher rates of smoking in cancer
patients than among controls, but the nitpickers pointed out that these
were retrospective studies and people didn\'t always remember things
accurately or report them truthfully.Â  Prospective studies were harder
to do, but when these also showed a link between smoking and cancer, the
nitpickers had another counterargument. They pointed out that people who
smoke also tend to have other vices and bad habits that might account
for the differences seen.

A critical thinker would look past the individual nitpicks, though. A
critical thinker subjects the objections to a theory or belief to the
same level of scrutiny as the theory or belief itself. The problem with
the nitpickers, of course, is that each time a different type of study
came out that showed a link between smoking and cancer, they had to come
up with yet another explanation. And all of these alternate explanations
had to be true simultaneously in order to negate the growing body of
evidence. It becomes a house of cards that eventually collapses under
its own weight.

One of the more fascinating episodes in this history was an alternate
theory proposed by the nitpickers. The theory was that it wasn\'t the
smoking that caused cancer, but rather the cancer that caused smoking.
This seems like a bizarre claim, since the smoking often precedes the
cancer by several decades. The explanation offered was the certain
people have a genetic makeup that makes them more vulnerable to cancer.
The same genes that make a person cancer prone might also make a person
more susceptible to nicotine addiction.

A critical thinker would have to carefully examine this claim. It\'s
true that in many situations, you can\'t easily identify whether A
causes B or B causes A. For example, there is a fair amount of research
that seems to indicate that an optimistic and hopeful attitude is
associated with better outcomes when facing a serious illness or
disease. Does this positive outlook cause these people to have a
stronger immune system that allows them to better battle the disease? Or
is it possible that the disease itself is less virulent in certain
people, possibly in ways that are difficult to measure directly. Perhaps
these people with the less virulent disease know something that the
doctors don\'t and it manifests itself as a more positive attitude. So
maybe it is prognosis of the disease itself that causes the differing
attitudes and outlooks rather than the attitudes and outlooks affecting
the prognosis of the disease.

With cancer and smoking, however, a critical thinker can easily identify
which is the cause. If it were true that a genetic predisposition to
cancer were associated with a genetic predisposition to addictability,
then these cancer genes would operate the same way in countries where
cigarettes were easily available as in countries where cigarettes were
hard to come by. That\'s not really the case, though. In China,
cigarettes came into widespread use much later than in Europe and
America. The late surge in lung cancer cases in China that followed the
wide distribution of cigarettes contradicts the hypothesis that it is
the genes rather than the cigarettes.

Keep in mind that contrasting the rates of smoking and cancer in
different countries is, by itself, a rather weak form of evidence. There
are many obvious and subtle differences between China and America. The
value of the data on smoking and cancer in China, however, is that it is
grossly inconsistent with the belief that cancer causes smoking. To
maintain this belief, you would have to postulate that a mutation
occurred in the genes of most Chinese people right around the time that
cigarettes were widely adopted.

In summary, it\'s not so much that the belief that smoking causes cancer
is based on perfect and unflawed data, but rather that the flaws are
trivial compared to the flaws in the arguments of those who believe in
alternative explanations.

was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy Hospital.
Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am reproducing
it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the Children\'s
Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page with
[general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse for
pages similar to this one at [Category: Critical
appraisal](../category/CriticalAppraisal.html).
<!---More--->
appraisal](../category/CriticalAppraisal.html).
pages similar to this one at [Category: Critical
[general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse for
Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page with
it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the Children\'s
Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am reproducing
was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy Hospital.

<!---Do not use
**[StATS]:** **What is critical thinking? (created
was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy Hospital.
Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am reproducing
it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the Children\'s
Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page with
[general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse for
pages similar to this one at [Category: Critical
appraisal](../category/CriticalAppraisal.html).
--->

