---
title: "PMean: The biggest statistics papers of all time"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/biggest-statistics-papers/"
date: "2016-03-26"
category: Blog post
tags: Writing research papers
output: html_document
---

I'm giving a short talk about the Kaplan-Meier curve and found out an
interesting fact about the 1958 paper by Edward Kaplan and Paul Meier
that introduced this curve. It represents the 11th most cited research
paper of all time. There's a nice graphic in a [Nature
paper](http://www.nature.com/news/the-top-100-papers-1.16224) that
allows you to review the top 100 most cited papers of all time. There
are a few other statistics papers on this list as well.

<!---More--->

The Kaplan-Meier reference is Kaplan EL, Meier P. "Nonparametric
estimation from incomplete observations." J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 53,
457--481 (1958). It was cited over 38,000 times as of the publication
date of the Nature article.

The next article is on the Cox regression model. The reference is Cox
DR. "Regression models and life-tables" J. R. Stat. Soc., B 34, 187--220
(1972). It was cited over 28,000 times and represents the 24th most
cited research paper.

The next best statistics paper is one that I've cited myself. Bland JM,
Altman DG. "Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two
methods of clinical measurement" Lancet 327, 307--310 (1986). This paper
introduces the Bland-Altman plot and explains why a simple t-test or a
simple correlation is the wrong way to compare two clinical
measurements. It is ranked \#29 and was cited over 23,000 times.

The next paper is one that a Psychology colleague recommended to me.
Baron RM, Kenny DA. "The moderator--mediator variable distinction in
social psychological-research --- conceptual, strategic, and statistical
considerations" J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 51, 1173--1182 (1986). The term
"moderator variable" and "mediator variable" sound very similar, but
they are quite different and require quite different statistical models.
This paper is ranked \#33 and was cited over 23,000 times.

The next paper is more of an applied paper, but it prominently displays
the bootstrap method, so it is worth mentioning here. Felsenstein J.
"Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach using the bootstrap"
Evolution 39, 783--791 (1985). It is ranked \#41 and was cited over
21,000 times.

You might argue whether this is a statistics paper or not, but ranked
\#46 with over 18,000 citations is Zadeh LA. "Fuzzy sets" Inform.
Control 8, 338--353 (1965).

Ranked \#57 with almost 16,000 citations is Dempster AP, Laird NM, Rubin
DB. "Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via EM algorithm" J. R.
Stat. Soc., B 39, 1--38 (1977). This paper documents a commonly used
approach to estimate missing values using a wide range of statistical
models.

Next is a paper that is (in my humble opinion) not deserving of that
many citations. The paper, Duncan, D. B. "Multiple range and multiple F
tests" Biometrics 11, 1--42 (1955), talks about a post hoc test used
frequently in analysis of variance, but unlike other post hoc tests, it
does not protect the overall Type I error rate. It appears that Duncan's
test is popular anyway. It is ranked \#63 with over 15,000 citations.

Landis JR, Koch GG. "The measurement of observer agreement for
categorical data." Biometrics 33, 159--174 (1977) presents the kappa
statistic. It is ranked \#68 with almost 15,000 citations.

Akaike H. "A new look at statistical-model identification" IEEE Trans.
Automat. Contr. 19, 716--723 (1974) presents the AIC (Akaike Information
Criteria) statistic. It is ranked \#73 with over 14,000 citations.

The first paper on the list that I was totally unfamiliar with is
Kirkpatrick S, Gelatt CD, Vecchi MP. "Optimization by simulated
annealing" Science 220, 671--680 (1983). Simulated annealing is used a
lot in Statistics, but not by me. This paper is ranked \#86 with over
13,000 citations.

Marquardt DW. "An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear
parameters" J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math. 11, 431--441 (1963) documents a
fundamental algorithm for nonlinear least squares regression. It is
ranked \#88 with over 13,000 citations.

Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP. "MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models" Bioinformatics 19, 1572--1574 (2003) is another
paper I am totally unfamiliar with. Apparently this MrBayes 3 program is
quite commonly used because it was cited over 12,000 times. It is \#100
on the list.
:::

