---
title: Where do research ideas come from? by Ronan Conroy
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/99/ideas.html
date: 1999-09-20
category: Blog post
tags: Grant writing
output: html_document
---
****[StATS]:** Where do research ideas come from? by
Ronan Conroy (September 20, 1999)**

This is an HTML format version of an email by Ronan Conroy on April 9,
1999 to edstat-l, an Internet list and to sci.stat.edu, a USENET group.
This email summarized a presentation he made about how to develop ideas
for research. I have made some minor formatting changes (mostly the use
of bolding, bulleting, and indenting to highlight the major themes), but
all of the credit for writing up this summary belongs to Ronan Conroy.
Part of this presentation represents a summary of discussions on
edstat-l and sci.stat.edu. Here is the acknowledgement in Dr. Conroy\'s
original email.

*I\'d like to thank the many people who took part in the discussion, or
who wrote to me privately, and to stress that the quotes in it are often
the person who made the point most memorably, rather than the only
person who said it.*

*Many thanks to Chris Zorn, Gabriele Susinno, Giovanni S. Leonardi,
the\... inimitable dennis\... roberts, Joe Ward, Michael Granaas, Roland
Andersson, Jay Warner, Alex Heath, The Anthonys, Bob Frick, Jerry
Dallal, Tjen-Sien Lim, Tim Cole, John F. Schnell, Robert C. Knodt, Paul
Velleman and Joseph L. McCrary. Did I say Herman Rubin? I did now.*

This material is reproduced with permission from Dr. Conroy. For what
it\'s worth, I have included a copy of the [original email](ideas1.htm).
It\'s pretty clear that there was some formatting in Dr. Conroy\'s
original document that got lost when it was translated to a text format
for email.

**Introduction**

**This paper tackles one of the questions that statisticians dread most:
the most basic one of all. How do you start formulating a research
project?** It began life as a talk at a research seminar in the Rotunda
Hospital, Dublin. Trying to write it up, I decided to mail the
statistics lists that I subscribe to. This paper has been greatly
enriched by the ideas and discussion generated on edstat-l, the
statistics teaching list, as well as contributions from subscribers to
the stata list and the UK statistics list allstat. Quotes are often
attributed to the only person who made the point most memorably, but
many of the ideas emerged repeatedly in different postings. I\'d like to
thank all those who took part in the discussion.

**Exploring your environment**

The first thing you need to do is **identify your resources for
research**. This is often easier when you first arrive somewhere. After
a while you begin seeing an environment as the place where you work or
live or eat. You need to see it with a fresh eye to see it as a
potential research environment.

Don\'t forget that your research environment includes not just your
patients and your colleagues, but also includes **any source of data,
ideas or help that you have access to**. Many of my own research
projects have taken shape because my office is next door to the
psychology department; a casual remark has often triggered a flurry of
speculation, articles rooted out, contacts mentioned and so on.

**The internet is also a valuable environment**. Discussion lists
abound,which can provide not just free advice but also an insight into
current controversies and new directions in research. Simply subscribing
to a list and reading the postings (the word for a person who does this
is a lurker) without taking part in the discussions will often give you
ideas.

**General resources**

How much **time** will you be able to devote to research? To what extent
can you integrate it into your daily work?

Will **colleagues** help? For instance, if you need blood taken outside
working hours, will the doctor on call oblige? Will nursing staff
collaborate by collecting extra information?

Do you have **access** to a person, unit or department with a specific
research interest? They can often be a useful source of ideas. Never
underestimate the value of just going for coffee with someone who does a
lot of research, or, better, a research team. The speed with which a
bunch of researchers can take a vague idea and shape it into a research
design is amazing. Most of these ideas go nowhere, but eavesdropping on
the process can help you to do it yourself.

Giovanni Leonardi of the Environmental Epidemiology Unit at London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine put it like this: *\"There are
many potential research ideas that never make it to becoming research
projects, and the likelihood that a research idea will become a research
project is heavily influenced by this idea having being selected and
refined in an environment where potential ideas are routinely tested for
their viability. Think of this as \'natural selection\' of research
ideas within the research environment.\"*

Do you have access to a **statistician**, or someone who can advise you
on study design and sample size?

What **library** facilities do you have access to? Skimming journals is
a good ideas generator, which I will deal with in more detail later; but
access to a good library, including literature searching and reprint
ordering facilities, is a must. Add extra points for library staff who
are willing to do literature searching with you looking over their
shoulder to refine the search.

What **computer** facilities are available?

-   Ideally you should be able to **write your own research papers and
    reports**.
-   This is helped greatly by **being able to create tables and
    graphs**, so if you can\'t do this, learn.
-   The next real bonus is having a **dedicated bibliographic package**
    which you can use to store, organize and annotate your references,
    and to generate bibliographies for papers \-- well worth investing
    in.
-   Finally, have you a **statistical package**, or access to someone
    who will do your statistics for you? Ideally, you should be able to
    examine your data using graphs and tables, rather than handing the
    whole analysis over to a number cruncher. Professional statisticians
    are best used to answer complex questions, but you should be able to
    do the simple statistics yourself, perhaps guided by a statistician.
    Not being able to do any statistics means that you lost contact with
    your data at the vital point when it is being investigated for
    patterns, anticipated and unanticipated.

What are they **funding** this year? This sounds like a cynical point,
but if there are funds available for research in specific areas, make
use of them. What charities are there who might be interested in your
research area? Talk to colleagues; there is often no single listing of
available research sponsors, and you have to rely on the grapevine.

**Specific resources**

Do you have access to **information already collected** which could be
the basis for a research project? This information could have been
collected as **routine clinical information**. Although you probably
cannot do a research project solely on the contents of patients\'
charts, routinely collected information may allow you to

-   Identify **patient groups that are interesting to study** (and
    figure out if there are enough of them to be worth studying!)
-   Identify **controls**
-   Add **already-collected clinical information** to the data that you
    will collect in the course of your project.

Information may also be available as an **offshoot of another research
project**. You may liaise with another research project and

-   Study a **subgroup** of their patients in more detail
-   **Follow up** a previously-studied group
-   Add a **sub-study** of your own to a study that is being planned or,
    not so easy, ongoing.

It is a good idea to **talk to people who are doing research in the
setting in which you work**. They will be able to spot potential
difficulties in proposals, and may also have useful ideas as to what
they would do if they had access to your facilities.

**Potential projects**

Now all you need to do is to **get an idea for a project which will be
realistic, given the resources available to you**. This is often a
stumbling block. I had one person come into the office to discuss a
research project with me. \'*I have 24 patients with rapid cycling mood
disorder*\' he said. And stopped, waiting for me to say something. The
trouble is that 24 patients with rapid cycling mood disorder is no more
a research project than 24 trout in a shoebox. What you need to ask
yourself is \'*what do we not know about rapid cycling mood disorder*\'?

One very important piece of advice that recurred frequently in the
edstat-l discussion was the need to **develop many ideas
simultaneously**. Christie Brown, Assistant Professor of Marketing at
University of Michigan Business School tells her students to imagine
that inside them they have a large basket of research ideas, some better
than others:

*\'I point students toward Donald Campbell\'s work on creativity.
Campbell suggests one secret to generating better ideas lies in the
QUANTITY of ideas generated. In other words you stand the best chance of
pulling an idea from the \"high\" end of your good-idea basket if you
make a lot of draws.\'* (Campbell, Donald T. \"Blind variation and
selective retentions in creative thought as in other knowledge
processes.\" Psychological Review. 1960;67:380-400.)

**Don\'t focus prematurely on a single idea**. Develop a few together.
It\'s like the process of conception: the chances of a child resulting
from a single act of sexual intercourse are small. But the chances of a
child not resulting from regular sexual intercourse are likewise small.
**Carry a notebook and write down every idea that you get, good or
bad**. You will learn from thinking about why the bad ones are bad as
well as from why the good ones are good.

Christie Brown again: \'*Write down everything. Do not self-censor. Keep
a log of your baby-ideas in case they end up being worth pursuing. Get
in the habit of generating at least one idea based on everything you
read in your domain and even out of it*.

Bob Frick, a cognitive scientist, actually forces students to develop a
number of research ideas as a learning exercise. \'*The assignment was
to come up with three \"kernels\", and the students had about a month to
do it. The notion was that they were supposed to find some original idea
they had. It usually ended up being an original observation. Original to
them \-- it didn\'t have to be original to the field of psychology.
Their original idea would then be a kernel that could be developed into
an experiment. Most people have these, but they don\'t pay attention.*\'

**Extending the ideas of others**

Much of the discussion on edstat-l centred around where ideas for
research projects come from. The sources of ideas divide into two:

-   **Replicating/extending** the work of others
-   Doing something **original**.

I\'ll take the easy one first!

Repeating research that has been done by others doesn\'t sound like
task, but there are several important reasons why it needs to be done,
and there are some other benefits too. The reasons why research needs to
be replicated include:

**Local research is needed to make sure that findings from other
countries apply locally**. Indeed, basic research is constantly needed
to monitor local health needs and to evaluate the services being
delivered.

-   **Is the problem the same here?** For instance, research has shown
    that liaison psychiatry in Ireland sees a very different spectrum of
    morbidity than its counterpart in the US. Planning services using US
    models is inappropriate. If you suspect that the service in which
    you work sees a spectrum of patients or problems that is different
    to what you would expect, research this. It can lead to a better
    understanding of the health service needs in your service.
-   **Do the strategies worked out elsewhere apply?** Many treatments
    and interventions have been researched in settings that may be quite
    different to your own. You might well ask if they are best for your
    setting.

**All research needs extension to new contexts** and development along
an obvious line - Clinical trials are often done on homogeneous,
idealised patient groups; they need extension to realistic groups such
as those with comorbidity, or beyond the age range of the original
research. Think of

-   **Treatment of hypertension in the elderly**. This is a classic case
    where treatment was wrong for many years because it was based on the
    results of studies of younger patients.
-   **Use of treatments in neonates that have only been studied in older
    children or adults**. This example has become topical recently, as
    paediatricians have realised that very young children are often
    excluded from treatment trials, yet the treatments end up being used
    to treat them,
-   **Many treatments are evaluated on patients who have \'pure\'
    diagnoses**, while they are frequently applied to people who have
    more than one disorder.

**Factors which have been identified in a disease may be present in
other similar diseases**. Since its role in peptic ulcer disease was
uncovered, H pylori has been investigated for many other unsolved
crimes.

-   Is it responsible for the **digestive symptoms some pregnant women
    experience**?
-   Is it **linked to cancers?**

Yes, there is a feeling of a bandwagon rolling along, but someone has to
check out these questions.

**You may spot an explanation which the original study failed to
identify and test**. This is, of course, classic \'stroke-of-genius\'
research. Just remember, though, that the explanations that are most
often overlooked are the commonest, most familiar things.

**You may not believe a piece of research**. Not all research is good
research. I have, several times, replicated and extended research
because I didn\'t believe it. Incredible research deserves to be
replicated. If you confirm the original findings, you have helped to
overcome the resistance that they will find in being accepted. If you
fail to confirm the findings, this in itself is interesting. Though try
to make sure that the original author isn\'t asked to review your paper!

Even doing **a straightforward replication of a previous study** can be
a very worthwhile exercise. As a first project, it means that you
already have a \'canned\' methodology, and you will learn a lot about
running, analysing and presenting research, But there are often
surprises too.

Chris Zorn of Emory University wrote: \'*As a social scientist
responsible for training grad students in statistics, one thing that
I\'ve always found useful is replications While the main reason I use
replications is to teach students statistics and/or software, these
exercises often prompt them to extend the work they are replicating.
These can range from the simple (e.g. testing for relationships in the
data that the original investigators didn\'t look for) to the very
involved. The result is often interesting, if a bit derivative, research
projects, some of which have led to PhD theses, etc.*\'

Andersson Roland puts it simply: *Dig where you stand*. That is, make
use of all the data that is already at hand and that nobody had time to
analyse. Almost always there will be unexpected or unknown patterns in
these data that can be detected if you analyse them with an open mind.
You do not always need to have an research idea ready when you start.
They will come up when you try to formulate an explanation for the
patterns that you find in your data.

Alex Heath, an economist from Australia, wrote: *A good way to get
started thinking about research questions for me is to find things which
have been done overseas (usually the US or the UK) and adapt them to
Australian data. I find that once you start replicating things you find
interesting twists and turns which allow you to say something completely
new.*

Although I have replicated several studies because I didn\'t believe
them, this probably isn\'t the best spirit in which to replicate. But
neither should you simply accept the original research as scripture.
Paul Velleman, the person responsible for the DataDesk statistical
package and ActivStats, a statistical teaching package, wrote in praise
of an attitude of well-informed skepticism: *This misses the most
important part of the process \-- an abiding skepticism. You must know
your science before you can be intelligently skeptical about it, but
just because you know what is common wisdom doesn\'t mean you should
believe it. Indeed, if science is to progress, you must maintain a
willingness to disbelieve. You don\'t do research by replicating
previous results but by doubting them.*

Dennis Roberts, responding to this, said: *a good replication study does
not have to be done BECAUSE one doubts them but rather, to bolster the
case that the research findings made \...*

I think that he and Paul really just differ in emphasis, with Dennis
arguing that \'replication is very valuable \... we don\'t do enough of
it \... \' while Paul cautions against literal-minded repetition. I
think everyone would agree that **the scientific idea of replication is
doing something more intelligent than just looking for what the other
guys already saw**.

Paul makes the point, too, that it is hard to sit down and work
carefully through a set of data without coming up with at least one
pattern that needs further investigation. **You may start by replicating
a study, but this is almost guaranteed to act as a springboard to
innovative questions of your own.**

**Getting a research idea by reading papers.**

**You can simply bury yourself in the library with a whole year\'s worth
of your favourite journal** and, starting from the most recent issue,
use a series of filters to identify studies that you would be interested
in and capable of extending. Even when I\'m not in need of a research
project, I often graze my way through a small stack of journals, picking
up an interesting methodological approach here, or a useful measurement
technique there. Many of my more prolific colleagues do this a lot. One,
in particular, seems able to rummage out a half-a-dozen relevant journal
articles from her shelves on any topic in about five minutes.

If I am looking for a potential project, I look at each article in turn
and ask:

-   **Does the title sound interesting?** If so, look at the abstract.
    There is little point in taking on a research project that doesn\'t
    sound interesting. It will be a lot of work, so it will have to hold
    your attention.
-   **Can I extend this study to a relevant patient group?** Think about
    the sorts of patients you have access to\--would it be interesting
    to try this on them?
-   **Can I extend the methods by assessing something not assessed in
    the original paper, or increasing quality of assessment?** Remember
    that you are one of your own best research resources. Can you refine
    the study design by substituting a personal interview or a medical
    examination for a self-administered questionnaire?
-   **Read the end of the discussion to see if the authors identify
    areas for future research**. Usually the researchers will make a big
    play to inflate the importance of their area of interest, and do a
    paragraph of \'we-simply-must-know\' stuff. They are usually either
    working on this themselves or they have applied for a grant already,
    so if you decide to follow up their suggestion, move fast.
-   If you find that an article catches your attention as a possible
    project, **do a literature search to get a feel for the area** (and
    look carefully through the references in the original article, of
    course; aside from identifying useful articles to read, you will get
    an idea of the sorts of journals that might take your paper, and you
    can target it accordingly).
-   **Contact the authors**. Authors love to hear from people who think
    that what they are researching is interesting. They often provide
    advice, access to unpublished manuscripts, free consultation time
    simply because that\'s the way research works. Be prepared to do the
    same in your turn! The easiest way to contact the authors is get an
    email address. Search the website of their institution if the
    article doesn\'t have an email address, or try using an email search
    engine on the internet to find them. People reply faster to email,
    and you can bombard them with small queries which would be
    irritating in letters. And, of course, keep them in touch with your
    work. They may be a great help when it comes to analysing and
    writing up.
-   **Finally, you should also think about plundering the abstracts from
    conferences**. There may well be something there, and the work will
    be newer than published articles. If you are actually at a
    conference, seek out the people who are doing research that would
    interest you. Over coffee you can usually get ideas for several
    projects from them. One favourite ploy I use is to ask them how they
    would do their research if they could start all over again, knowing
    what they know now.

**Getting your own ideas**

This is an even harder subject to write about than extending and
developing the ideas of others. (Did I say plagiarising? \-- Never!).
The secret seems to be **keeping your eyes and ears open all the time**.
The observation doesn\'t have to be complicated. On the contrary,
spotting an obvious question in an everyday event often has greater
potential.

Jack Schnell of Department of Economics at the University of Alabama in
Huntsville remembers simple advice he got as a student: *\'look out of
the window\', meaning \'pay attention to what is happening out there in
the world, look for issues that are ripe for investigation\'. And since
that time I have tried to do just that. For me, this has been more
intellectually sustaining than, say, combing through some literature in
the hopes of seeing a useful extension.*

A simple observation can spark off a whole train of ideas. Roland
Andersson, of the Department of Surgery in Joenkoeping, Sweden, said
*For me it started like this: I observed that we had had 12 patients
with appendicitis during one week. The following weeks we had only one
or two. I wondered: \'Had we had an epidemic of appendicitis?\'. I
happened to know about Knox space-time analysis and I started off from
there and finally have written a thesis about \'Appendicitis -
epidemiology and diagnosis\'. Lots of new questions arise and I am now
involved in a (as it seems) never ending project about aspects of
appendicitis.* (And please, don\'t worry if you have no idea what Knox
space-time analysis is; the important point is that Roland brought
together a specialised theoretical framework which he already knew and a
common everyday observation. In other words, he applied the theory he
knew to the world outside the window.)

**But what frame of mind, what view of the world do you need in order to
have productive research ideas?** A lot of discussion focussed on this
question. At one extreme was Robert Hamer, who very much doubted whether
you could teach anyone how to look at the world in a questioning manner.
I don\'t think that this is true, though. **We are brought up in a way
that does not encourage us to question the explanations we are given for
things**. Don\'t forget that all children are hungry to find things out,
to know why things are so. This voice of hunger for knowledge and
delight in figuring things out is much smaller and more timid by the
time we have grown up, but with patience it can be called back. **It
takes time to rid ourselves of this learned uncuriuosity**.

The trick is doing what children do: **asking lots of questions and
teasing out the logical consequences of the answers**. Paul Velleman
again: *\"Dennis is right that the problem is nudging the mind. We need
to start that process in childhood. We must cultivate in our children
and our students a broad-based skepticism coupled with a sense that
there \*is\* order in the universe.\"*

These are the sorts of questions that scientists and other children ask.

-   **How does this work?**
-   What is the **proposed biological explanation** for the thing I am
    looking at?
-   **How do we know?**
-   Is there **another possible explanation?**

One must maintain an **active and abiding skepticism about the
explanations and models that have been proposed in science**.
Skepticism, which Paul Velleman identifies as a key attitude, doesn\'t
involve simple disbelief, but rather **being able to entertain a number
of different explanations at once**.

This struck a chord with Robert Knodt: *After being involved with
masters and doctoral students for over thirty-years and looking back for
an answer to the original post, I find that the statement above applied
to over 90% of those I helped\... The first person I worked with was
bothered by a statement in a 10th grade Biology book which said that
trees were pruned in the fall in order to make them fill out areas and
become more symmetrical. This still bothered him eight years later. He
finally did is work on \'wound\' hormones in plants.*

**Says who?** Many pieces of medical knowledge are folkloric, and the
evidence is slender. In particular

-   **Clinical signs and diagnostic tests\--are they really reliable and
    valid**? The apex beat, for instance, is taught as a religion in
    some cardiology departments. Research into the repeatability of this
    clinical sign shows that it is hard for two observers to locate it
    in the same patient, much less in the same place.
-   **Factors are supposed to be associated with prognosis or diagnosis:
    where\'s the evidence?** Women with small feet, for instance, are
    supposed to be at higher risk of caesarian section because of the
    baby\'s head being too big for the pelvis. But this assertion rests
    on a couple of small and doubtful studies. Better research (already
    done\--sorry!) has shown that this is just a medical myth.
-   **Rituals of patient management** (surgical masks, changing wound
    dressings) may have no evidence to support their usefulness.

**I don\'t believe that!** Always trust your disbelief. Often a trip to
the library will put your mind at rest, but think about

-   **Alternative explanations** for things you have been told
-   Your feeling that **what you see in your own practice is not what
    you have been told you will see**

**Why are we doing this?** At every point in clinical practice there are
decision forks. Some may be invisible (we always do X when Y happens)
but these are the most interesting! For example

-   What is the **most informative sequence** of diagnostic tests?
-   What are the **treatment options at a given moment?**
-   How do we **decide between them?**

**Why are they both right?** Some disagreements in the literature are
because no-one has yet spotted the reason why two different sets of
investigators should have observed data that were seemingly
contradictory.

**Can we learn from the abnormal?** We learn once from describing the
normal\--normal course of disease, normal range of variation etc. We
learn a second time by examining cases that do not fit the general
picture. Rare, pathological conditions can give us an **insight into how
more subtle, commonplace processes work**.

-   **Congenital homocysteinemia and CHD** led to the investigation of
    homocysteine in CHD in \'normal\' people
-   Research into **doctor-patient interactions in hypochondriasis**
    gave leads for investigating health anxiety as a dynamic in these
    interactions in normal patients.

**Final thoughts**

I don\'t know where ideas come from, but I do know that you get more
ideas if you **try to remember everything that happens that doesn\'t
have a good explanation**. I carry a little black notebook which can
simply be used to note phone numbers and things I have to buy next time
I go shopping, but it also means that I have a way of writing down an
idea the instant I spot something interesting.

The last thing I want to say is based on my experiences teaching music
to adolescents, as much as teaching research methods to medical
students. **The biggest obstacle you encounter is a feeling that you
can\'t do this**; that you aren\'t the sort of person who can sing, or
make interesting observations or pose original questions. **Just
remember: this is what you did as a child, before you were taught any
different. So you already know how to do this; just think of yourself as
a little rusty.**

The copyright for this page belongs to Ronan Conroy. Need more
information? I have a page with [general help
resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse for pages similar
to this one at [Category: Grant writing](../category/GrantWriting.html).
<!---More--->
to this one at [Category: Grant writing](../category/GrantWriting.html).
resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse for pages similar
information? I have a page with [general help
The copyright for this page belongs to Ronan Conroy. Need more

<!---Do not use
****[StATS]:** Where do research ideas come from? by
The copyright for this page belongs to Ronan Conroy. Need more
information? I have a page with [general help
resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse for pages similar
to this one at [Category: Grant writing](../category/GrantWriting.html).
--->

