---
title: "PMean: SAS University. It's SAS and it's free"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/sas-university/"
date: "2018-01-12"
category: Blog post
tags: SAS software
output: html_document
---

I am teaching a class, Introduction to SAS, that I helped design, but
one where another faculty member did all the heavy lifting. I used to
teach SAS classes, and I even helped organize a regional SAS conference,
but stopped abruptly in 1998. So I'm relearning SAS and one thing that
is helping a lot is a product called SAS University which allows you to
use SAS for non-commercial purposes for free. Here's how SAS University
works.

<!---More--->

SAS Institute has a [nice overview of this
software](https://www.sas.com/en_us/software/university-edition.html).
It is, as expected, going to stress the positive and downplay the
negative, but it is still worth reading. The also offer an online forum,
[SAS Analytics
U](https://communities.sas.com/t5/SAS-Analytics-U/bd-p/sas_analytics_u),
and a book published by SAS Press, [An Introduction to SAS University
Edition](https://www.sas.com/store/books/categories/getting-started/an-introduction-to-sas-university-edition/prodBK_68380_en.html).

SAS University requires a virtual computer, and you an set it up using a
special virtualization software. You can run [SAS in the
cloud](https://aws.amazon.com/marketplace/pp/B00WH10IKW) through Amazon
Web Services (AWS).

I choose to use virtualization software on my computer and selected
their recommended solution, Oracle VirtualBox for Windows. If you are
already using a different virtualization program like VMware Workstation
Player, then that should work also. The virtualization software is
different, of course, if you are on the Mac or Linux, and I cannot
comment intelligently about either of these, except to say that it looks
a bit easier than on Windows.

I'll probably experiment with AWS and will report on this blog once I
get it working.

The second step is to set up a folder for SAS University. It can go
anywhere and have any name, as long as it has a subfolder called
"myfolders". This folder is your portal between your local computer and
your virtual machine. To import data to the virtual machine, move it
into myfolders. Any output that you create in the virutal machine is
available outside the virtual machine via myfolders.

After you have your virtual machine software set up, download the SAS
University vApp. Note the clever contraction for virtual application.

Then you have to tell the virtual machine about your wonderful vApp and
let it know that the directory where you placed the myfolders
subdirectory is designated as a shared folder. You don't have to have a
shared folder, but it makes life a lot easier.

Then start up your virtual machine and start the SAS vApp withing the
virtual machine. You'll get an informational window that needs to stay
open until you're done with SAS.

One last thing. You access your virtual machine through your web
browser. Point your browser to http://localhost:10080. You get to choose
between SAS Studio and [Jupyter notebooks](http://jupyter.org/). I'd
recommend starting with SAS Studio. It very closely mimics the look and
feel of the regular SAS product. If you're comfortable with Jupyter, you
may switch to that interface.

So what are the downsides to using SAS University?

First, you cannot use it for commercial purposes. It's great for
learning SAS, but don't try to use this to solve big business problems.

Second, it is not quite like using SAS itself, but it does come very
close.

Third, there's a layer between you and SAS that will sometimes limit you
or slow you down. While you are inside the virtual machine, you are
blind to everything that is on your computer except the stuff that is
stored in myfolders.

Fourth, you don't get the complete SAS product. It does come very close.
The one thing that you will miss is SAS/Graph. That doesn't mean that
you can't do graphics, but it does mean that you will create graphs
differently with SAS University than with SAS itself. I'm in the process
of exploring this further.

There are upsides as well.

First, it gives you access to SAS where you might not normally have it.
I can run SAS from my desktop computer at UMKC but if I want to run SAS
from my laptop, I'm stuck using a VPN (remote access) connection. SAS
University allows me to run SAS without having to rely on remote access.

Second, SAS University allows you to experiment with Jupyter notebooks.
This is a completely different way of interacting with SAS. You may hate
it or you may love it, but it represents an option, and extra options
are never bad. Jupyter has a markdown interface that allows you to
intersperse program code and program output with nicely formatted
documentation. There's a similar interace to SAS called
[SASweave](http://homepage.divms.uiowa.edu/~rlenth/SASweave/) that you
might also consider, but SASWeave is more of a product for people who
already have a commercial SAS license and want to explore markdown or
who want to more closely integrate SAS and R. Both Jupyter and SASweave
represent a [stylistic approach called literate
programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming). I'm a
big fan of literate programming and I'll try to write about it on my
blog.

Third, SAS Studio provides a nice menu driven approach for generating
SAS code. I'm not a big fan of a menu driven interface to SAS, but it is
an extra option that some people may really appreciate.

I'll try to post some simple SAS University examples on my blog as I
learn and try new things.


