---
title: "Interesting resources discovered during IDAD 2022"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: new
date: "2022-04-21"
categories: 
- Blog post
tags:
- Teaching resources
output: html_document
page_update: complete
---

During the talks at the Innovations in Design Analysis and Dissemination (IDAD): Frontiers in Biostatistics & Data Science in 2022, I took a peek at various website and articles. These were either ones that the speakers mentioned or ones I googled on a topic that they covered. I am placing links to these here in case I want to look at them later.

There is no rhyme or reason to what I decided to include here. This page is not intended to be a comprehensive or representative summary of this meeting.

#### The fused Kolmogorov filter

Qing Mai, Hui Zou. The fused Kolmogorov filter: A nonparametric model-free screening method. arXiv:1403.7701, and later in the Annals of Applied Statistics. Available in [pdf format][mai1].

+ A methodology to reduce the number of independent variables to a more manageable number.

[mai1]: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1403.7701

#### The SCAD penalty

Kenneth Tay. The SCAD penalty. Statistical Odds and Ends blog, 2018-07-31. Available in [html format][tay1].

[tay1]: https://statisticaloddsandends.wordpress.com/2018/07/31/the-scad-penalty/

#### Bayesian designs for extrapolating to pediatric patients

Matthew A. Psioda, Xiaoqiang Xue (2020) A Bayesian adaptive two-stage design for pediatric clinical trials, Journal of Biopharmaceutical Statistics, 30:6, 1091-1108, DOI: 10.1080/10543406.2020.1821704. Article is [behind a pay wall][psi1]

[psi1]: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10543406.2020.1821704

+ An alternative to the absolute value penalty used in LASSO regression.

#### Sample size calculation for survival data without the proportional hazards assumption

Brian Mosier, John Keighley, Milind Phadnis. A Macro to Calculate Sample Size for Studies Using the Proportional Time Assumption. Midwest SAS Users Group 2018 proceedings, Paper HS-083. Available in [pdf format][mos1].

+ While most power calculations use a proportional hazard assumption, it is more intuitive, perhaps, to calculate based on a proportional time assumption. This means, for example, that the time it takes for a certain percentage of the events to occur is twice as long for one group versus the other.

[mos1]: https://www.mwsug.org/proceedings/2018/HS/MWSUG-2018-HS-83.pdf
