---
title: "PMean: NIH is interested in big data"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/nih-big-data/"
date: "2014-02-24"
category: Blog post
tags: Big data
output: html_document
---

The National Institutes of Health has shown a recent interest in "big
data." You can define big data in several ways, but a common
characteristic is the three V's. Big data takes up a lot of space
(volume) and/or it comes at you very rapidly (velocity) and/or it comes
in a wide range of differing formats (variety). One of the recent
Requests for Applications (RFAs) from NIH spells out what types of
research into big data that they are interested in seeing. I might be
interested in applying, and would love to find some collaborators.
Here's a summary of what the RFA is all about.

<!---More--->

The RFA<U+00A0> calls for "the development of innovative approaches to tough
problems." You don't have to have "fully hardened" software, but you do
need to demonstrate proof of concept. NIH stresses repeatedly throughout
the proposal of the need to address biomedical data.Your application
needs to fit into one of four areas.

1\. Data compression/reduction. Big data often strains your computational
resources. To make big data work for you need some way to compress the
data or minimize redundancy while still maintaining data integrity.

2\. Data visualization. You need graphical tools that allow you to
"intuitively delve into and explore within the data, gaining both
insight into a dataset's structure and interrelationships and extracting
knowledge from the data." This is the area that I might be most
interested in, and I've done some work on visualizing large text files
that might be worth expanding on
([here](http://www.pmean.com/09/SurprisalMatrix.html) and
[here](http://www.pmean.com/10/TextFiles.html)).

3\. Data provenance. This was a new one on me. The RFA defines data
provenance as "the chronology or record of transfer, use, and alteration
of data that documents the reverse path from a particular set of data
back to the initial creation of a source dataset." Although the RFA does
not use the term "[reproducible
research](http://reproducibleresearch.net/index.php/Main_Page)," it is
pretty clear that data provenance is an important component of
reproducible research.

4\. Data wrangling. This is another term that is new to me, but I like
the imagery that it provides. The RFA defines data wrangling as
"activities that make data more usable by changing their form but not
their meaning." Tools for data warngling will help you in lots of ways:
submitting data to a repository, making it available on the Internet,
loading data into standard statistical software packages. The RFA
contrasts data wrangling from data mining, which is not a focus of the
RFA. Data mining, as the RFA defines it, involves "the extraction of
data content."

I may or may not write a grant in response to the RFA, but even if I
don't, it was worthwhile to read the RFA to see four areas in big data
that NIH sees the need for more work.

You can view the full RFA at
<http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-HG-14-020.html>.

![](http://www.pmean.com/images/nih-big-data01.png)




