---
title: "PMean: Never consult by email if you can help it"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/consult-by-email/"
date: "2016-07-27"
category: Blog post
tags: Human side of statistics
output: html_document
---

Consulting is always a back and forth process and often you will find
yourself re-working things because of communication problems. That's
okay, but keep in mind that communication problems are even worse when
they are done solely through email. Sometimes you have to consult this
way, but it greatly increases the amount of rework needed. Here's an
example.

<!---More--->

I was helping out a client who is working on several grants. So I've
gotten some data from him, some sample programs for an analysis that was
run elsewhere, and some other documentation. We last met a couple of
weeks ago, and I've been scanning and storing all the emails that have
been coming my way since then.

So I get an email on Friday asking how my progress was coming on a
sample size justification. Panic time! What sample size justification? I
go through my emails and assemble all of the attachments in a single
folder and print a few PDF files of key email messages. I think I missed
something in one of the earlier emails, but I can crank out the sample
size justification without too much delay. Most sample size
justifications take me about 15 minutes.

There's a fly in the ointment, though. This is a study that needs a
p-value adjustment known as the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate
(I've [written about it
before](http://www.pmean.com/05/MultipleComparisons.html), and I might
write something new about it in the next couple of days). So I take a
data set with 20 rows and 1431 columns and crank out some numbers. I was
hoping that I could justify the sample size based on the
ultra-conservative Bonferroni adjustment, but the numbers just didn't
work. So I remind myself how to do the false discovery rate
calculations, run a quick simulation and get the results.

I'm quite proud of myself and write to the client while the simulation
is running that I should have some answers soon. So he writes back, are
you using the experiment-X data (names changed to protect the innocent)
or the experiment-Y data? I write back that because experiment-X and
experiment-Y are so similar, it is probably safe to use either data set
because we extrapolate all the time when we do sample size
justifications. In particular, even if X and Y have different means, it
is not too unlikely that the standard devations are close because both
are using the same outcome measure. And even better, I point out that
the control groups are likely to be as close a match as you can get.

Then I do a panicked search through all my old emails. I have the
experiment-X data, but where is the experiment-Y data. I find the same
experiment-X data stored as attachments with slightly different names,
but experiment-Y data is nowhere to be found.

I get another email back from the client stating that his collaborator
is still working on the experiment-Y data. Well, "working on" is a bit
ambiguous, as it could mean working on cleaning and organizing the data
or it could mean working on a preliminary analysis. If the latter, I can
still run a sample size justification and all the time I invested on the
simple simulation of Benjamini and friends should run just fine as long
as the data from experiment-Y is structured much like the data in
experiment-X. I'm still waiting on a response for this, but as fast as
email is, the speed at which we can resolve this issue is glacial
compared to doing the same work face-to-face. And if the client was in
my office while I was running the simulation, he would have noticed in
30 seconds that I was using experiment-X data instead of experiment-Y
data.

I'm not blaming the client for all this confusion and I am not trying to
avoid blame for any problems that I may have caused. Anytime you have
communication you have the risk of miscommunication and you may end up
having to scrap all the work you've done and start over again. That
happens a lot in consulting. I'm writing this up because I have noticed
over time that the rework seems to be more common when you are
consulting predominantly by email.

So whenever a client wants me to do something, I try to do it while they
are watching. Not the tedious data management perhaps, though sometimes
I make them watch that but certainly the data analysis. It goes a lot
faster and there is a lot less rework. Most clients seem to like
watching as I do my work. They understand things at a deeper level than
if I just hand them the results in an email attachment. I can also
explain things in greater detail and they can ask questions in real time
rather than after the fact.

I couldn't arrange a face-to-face meeting for this sample size
justification, and that's okay. Just always remember that the time you
save by working at home might get lost because of the delays and
misunderstandings that crop up more often in email. That shouldn't stop
you from using email, but use it consciously and be aware of its
limitations.


