---
title: "PMean: My research contributions to reproductive toxicology"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/reproductive-toxicology/"
date: "2015-05-30"
category: Blog post
tags: Professional details
output: html_document
---

The U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) has a new biosketch format
where they ask you to summarize "up to five of your most significant
contributions to science." Here's a first draft of my research
contributions to reproductive toxicology.

<!---More--->

At the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), a
branch of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, I worked with
a toxicologist, Steven M. Schrader, on male reproductive toxicology. I
should note that Dr. Schrader also supervised a strong program in female
reproductive toxicology, and while I learned quite a bit about both
sides of the equation, a different statistician served as co-author on
the publications on female reproductive toxicology.

I was fortunate to arrive at NIOSH shortly after completion of a major
longitudinal study of sperm samples in a healthy cohort of unexposed
males. The longitudinal design required novel statistical measures and
graphical displays. This data set produced many publications including
two which won a major annual award, The Alice Hamilton award, for the
best publication of the year in occupational safety and health.

One of the smaller findings from the longitudinal study, but one which
illustrates some of the important considerations needed during the
statistical planning of research studies, examined the general practice
of requiring three separate blood draws to assess hormone levels such as
testosterone. Since hormones are pulsatile, the three blood draws were
assumed to help produce a more precise estimate of hormone levels for an
individual. While this is certainly true, in an occupational health
study, where the emphasis is often on comparing group means between
exposed and unexposed populations, the three blood draws could possibly
be "penny wise and pound foolish." The prospect of having three separate
blood draws could reduce overall participation rates in a study and the
longitudinal data set showed some hypothetical examples. Even a decrease
in participation as small as 10 or 20% could wipe out all the gains in
precision by requiring three blood draws rather than one.

In addition to the longitudinal study, I worked on the planning of
studies in humans examining occupational exposures to non-ionizing
radiation and lead, and helped develop a novel rabbit model for lead
exposure.

My research in male reproductive toxicology taught me how to handle the
complexities associated with longitudinal data and exposure studies.

As a side note, the lead author of the publication winning the Alice
Hamilton award is asked to give a lecture at the following year's award
ceremony. Since Dr. Schrader won in two consecutive years, he graciously
allowed me to speak in place of him the second time around. I chose as
my topic of my talk, a biography of W. Edwards Deming. I ended the talk
with an exhortation that NIOSH should adopt the principles of quality
control that Dr. Deming advocated. This talk led to the adoption of a
Total Quality Management program at NIOSH and I served on the first
quality improvement committee formed at NIOSH.

Grajewski B, Cox C, Schrader SM, Murray WE, Edwards RM, Turner TW, Smith
JM, Shekar SS, Evenson DP, Simon SD, Conover DL. Semen quality and
hormone levels among radiofrequency heater operators. J Occup Environ
Med. 2000 Oct;42(10):993-1005.

Schrader SM, Langford RE, Turner TW, Breitenstein MJ, Clark JC, Jenkins
BL, Lundy DO, Simon SD, Weyandt TB. Reproductive function in relation to
duty assignments among military personnel. Reprod Toxicol. 1998
Jul-Aug;12(4):465-8.

Moorman WJ, Skaggs SR, Clark JC, Turner TW, Sharpnack DD, Murrell JA,
Simon SD, Chapin RE, Schrader SM. Male reproductive effects of lead,
including species extrapolation for the rabbit model. Reprod Toxicol.
1998 May-Jun;12(3):333-46.

Schrader SM, Turner TW, Ratcliffe JW, Welch LS, Simon SD. Combining
reproductive studies of men exposed to 2-ethoxyethanol to increase
statistical power. Occupational Hygiene 1996: 2; 411-415.

Weyandt TB, Schrader SM, Turner TW, Simon SD. Semen analysis of military
personnel associated with military duty assignments. Reprod Toxicol.
1996 Nov-Dec;10(6):521-8.

Schrader SM, Ayers-Cumbo M, Turner TW, Simon SD, Ratcliffe J, Welch L,
Grajewski B, Weyandt T. Semen quality across populations. Molecular
Andrology 1995: 7; 105-121.

Schrader SM, Turner TW, Breitenstein MJ, Simon SD. Measuring male
reproductive hormones for occupational field studies. J Occup Med. 1993
Jun;35(6):574-6.

Schrader SM, Turner TW, Simon SD. Longitudinal study of semen quality of
unexposed workers. Sperm motility characteristics. J Androl. 1991
Mar-Apr;12(2):126-31.

Schrader SM, Breitenstein MJ, Turner TW, Simon SD. Longitudinal study of
semen quality of unexposed workers: seminal plasma characteristics. In:
Baccetti B ed. Comparative spermatology 20 years after. 1991; Vol. 75.
New York NY: Serno Symposia Publications; 905-908.

Schrader SM, Turner TW, Simon SD. Sources of variation of the sperm
penetration assay under field study conditions. ARTA 1991: 2(Suppl 4);
63-74.

Schrader SM, Turner TW, Simon SD. Longitudinal study of semen quality of
unexposed workers: sperm head morphometry. J Androl. 1990
Jan-Feb;11(1):32-9.

Schrader SM, Turner TW, Breitenstein MJ, Simon SD. Longitudinal study of
semen quality of unexposed workers. I. Study overview. Reprod Toxicol.
1988;2(3-4):183-90.

Here's a picture of Dr. Schrader, from a webpage on careers in
Andrology.

![3825413.png?1430165530 not found.](../../../web/images/15/reproductive-toxicology01.png)


