---
title: "PMean: Course proposal on setting up an independent consulting practice"
author: "Steve Simon"
source: "http://blog.pmean.com/course-proposal/"
date: "2014-05-13"
category: Blog post
tags: Human side of statistics
output: html_document
---

I was asked to prepare a proposal on a short course about consulting for
an upcoming Statistics conference. I had talked about this in an earlier
blog post. Here is the official submission which includes the course
description, outline and objectives, some information about my
qualifications to teach the class, and a summary of how this class fits
into the theme of the conference. Here's what I wrote.

<!---More--->

Title: How to Start and Run an Independent Statistical Consulting
Business

Description: An independent statistical consulting job is both rewarding
and challenging. If you follow this career path, you will need to learn
many business skills. This course will review practical issues that you
will face in setting up an independent consulting business. Should you
set up a Limited Liability Corporation or a Subchapter S corporation?
Should you bill by the hour or by the project? What insurance do you
need? Should you have a standard contract in place prior to any
consulting work?

In addition to these legal and accounting requirements, there are human
issues that you as an independent consultant will have to face. Your
most important job is finding new clients. The best method, by far, is
"word of mouth" and there are several strategies that you can adopt to
enhance your visibility and increase the number of referrals that you
get. You also need to know how to keep your current clients happy. This
class will include several small group exercises where you will share
your thoughts and experiences on how to handle specific cases involving
independent statistical consulting.

No specific knowledge about business models, accounting, or legal issues
is assumed

Outline & Objectives: Course outline: The first lecture will cover the
types of independent consultants and the contrast these with a
consultant who is part of a larger organization. This will be followed
by a small group exercise where students discuss their career goals in
one/five years. This followed by lectures on company types (sole
proprietorship, partnership, limited liability corporation) and a
discussion of the pros and cons of billing by the hour versus by the
project.

A second small group exercise presents a hypothetical consulting project
and asks each group to plan an estimate on the entire project cost or on
the hours needed. Additional lectures will cover contracts, accounting,
and insurance.

The last two lectures will discuss finding new clients and keeping
existing clients happy. This includes a third small group exercise on a
hypothetical consulting scenario that has gone sour. Students will
discuss whether they should end the consulting relationship or find ways
to get the interaction back on track.

The target audience is anyone who is considering a career as an
independent consultant or who is curious about the advantages and
disadvantages of this type of work.

About the instructor: Steve Simon is a part-time independent statistical
consultant with P.Mean Consulting and part-time faculty member in the
Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics at the University of
Missouri-Kansas City.

He presented a short course at the inaugural meeting of the Conference
on Statistical Practice in 2012, "Promoting Your Consulting Career in
the Era of Web 2.0â€³ and has led a roundtable discussion on the same
topic at the 2011 Joint Statistical Meetings. A brief summary of this
talk is on his website: http://www.pmean.com/12/promoting.html

He also was a panel member at the 2011 JSM on "Successful Statistical
Consulting: The Practicalities" and discussed "How Independent
Statistical Consulting is Different." For a brief overview of this
presentation, see http://www.pmean.com/11/ConsultingDifferences.html

Dr. Simon is the author of a book published by Oxford University Press,
"Statistical Evidence in Medical Trials. What Do the Data Really Tell
Us." He has a website (www.pmean.com) with over 1,300 pages on
statistics, research ethics, and evidence based medicine and is an
active participant in the Statistical Consulting Section Discussion
Board.

Relevance to conference goals: The first theme of the Conference on
Statistical Practice is "Communication, Impact, and Career Development."
This class addresses a very specific type of career development,
starting and running an independent consulting business. The course will
cover business skills, such as billing, contracts, and marketing that
participants need to advance their careers. This course will emphasize
communication with clients and customers, both to attract new clients
and to keep existing clients happy.
:::

