---
title: When is a control chart not a control chart?
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/07/AnomExample.html
date: 2007-02-06
category: Blog post
tags: Analysis of means, Control charts
output: html_document
---
**[StATS]: When is a control chart not a control
chart? (created 2007-02-06)**.

I found a pair of data sets on the web that represent counts and where
one goal of the data collection is to see if any of the individual
counts differ from the overall average. They look quite similar and you
might be tempted to analyze both of them using a control chart. But the
second example is different in subtle, but important ways and it is
better analyzed using an approach called Analysis of Means (ANOM).

The first example comes from the [NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook of
Statistical Methods](http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/index.htm).
This data set comes from a semiconductor manufacturing plant. The plant
produces wafers, each of which contains a hundred chips. These wafers
will have defects on them and we want to monitor the rate at which
defects occur to see if there is a shift for the better or for the worse
in manufacturing quality.

![](../../../web/images/07/AnomExample01.gif)

The average rate of defects is 16. Did any wafers produce defects above
the average of 16? You could take this literally and point out that the
3rd, 6th, 10th, etc. chips were above the average of 16. But you only
want to identify wafers that are above average after accounting for the
uncertainty inherent in this process. A control chart (in this
particular case a C chart) works well for this data.

![](../../../web/images/07/AnomExample02.gif)

The control limits are 8 and 32. Look for a single point outside the
control limits (wafer #24) or eight consecutive points on the same side
of the center line (no such examples in this chart). Some people will
divide the control charts into three zones and use rules like 2 out of 3
consecutive points in Zone A, or 4 out of five consecutive points in
Zone B.

The Fraser Institute produces an [Ontario hospital report
card](http://www.hospitalreportcards.ca/default.asp) on a variety of
measures. One measure if the volume of procedures performed at various
hospitals. There is some evidence that hospitals that perform a large
volume of procedures have better outcomes (an application, perhaps, of
the old saying "practice makes perfect"). Here is the data on the
number of carotid endarterectomy procedures performed in 2004-2005. Some
material in the middle of the web page was removed to shrink the image
size and to delete some data that is extraneous to this particular
discussion.

![](../../../web/images/07/AnomExample03.gif)
![](../../../web/images/07/AnomExample04.gif)

The average hospital performs 52.5 procedures. Which hospitals perform
more than the overall average? Your first instinct might be to use a
control chart again, and while this is not a terrible first step, it
does raise some issues. Most importantly, a control chart is, ore or
less,   a run chart with, a plot of the data in time sequence. There is
no time sequence for this data set. Each hospital started counting
procedures in January 2004 and stopped in December 2005. You could place
the data in alphabetical order, but that is a rather arbitrary choice,
and then what would you do with the hospitals that are unidentified? If
a hospital changed it's name, would you redraw the graph?

There's another difference and this is much more subtle. A control
chart represents a continuous monitoring of a work process. Although
there are some practical limits on the number of points in a control
chart, there is no obvious upper bound that you can readily identify.
You just keep on monitoring the quality of wafers until the factory
closes or until it switches to a different product.

Because a control chart has no obvious upper limit on its length, its
working characteristics are defined in terms of average run lengths. The
average run length is the number of data points that you would have to
place on the chart on average, before a point is declared to be out of
control. You want the average run length to be large (in the hundreds)
if the process actually is in control and to be small if the process is
actually out of control. The control limits are defined to optimize the
average run length.

With the hospital example, the size of the chart is limited to the
number of hospitals in Ontario (actually, the number in Ontario that
actually perform carotid endarterectomy). An average run length
statistic is meaningless here because the number of hospitals is fixed.
As a results the control limits defined in terms of average run length
may be too conservative or too liberal.

Instead, you should use a criteria that controls the probability that
one or more hospitals will be identified as performing above or below
the overall average. The general procedure for comparing a fixed number
of groups to see if one group deviates significantly from the overall
average is called analysis of means (ANOM).

The ANOM model can be used for continuous outcomes, though it relies on
an assumption of normality. It can also be used with proportions and
rates as long as the sample sizes are sufficiently large that a normal
approximation would hold.

The general formula for balanced data is

![](../../../web/images/07/AnomExample05.gif)

where I is the number of groups and N is the total sample size. If there
are n observations in each group, then N=nI. The quantity N-I represents
the degrees of freedom for the pooled estimate of standard deviation.
The table for h can be found in

-   Nelson et al, The Analysis of Means. **The Analysis of Means.**
    Peter R. Nelson, Peter S. Wludyka, Karen A.F. Copeland (2005)
    Philadelphia, PA: SIAM. [BookFinder4U
    link]](http://www.bookfinder4u.com/detail/089871592X.html)

You can also compute the critical value using a multivariate
t-distribution. There are a few complications. First the distribution
you are trying to describe represents deviations from an overall mean,
so there will be correlations in the data since each group contributes
to the overall mean. This correlation, -1/(I-1), is the same for any
pair of deviations. Second, the sum of the deviations must equal zero,
so this produces a degenerate distribution. This degeneracy means that
there is no inverse for the correlation matrix.

In R, there is a library, mvtnorm, that will allow you to compute the
percentiles needed for ANOM. Here's an example:

`i <- 25        co <- matrix(-1/(i-1),nrow=i,ncol=i)        diag(co) <- rep(1,i)        qmvt(p=0.95,tail="both.tails",corr=co,df=5000)`

For count data, you need to modify the formula slightly to

[Formula is misplaced. I will try to restore it soon.]

and there are further modifications if the data represents proportions
or rates, or if the sample size is unequal between groups. In this
example, I=25 (three of the data values are redundant). The upper and
lower limits are 31 and 74.

![](../../../web/images/07/AnomExample06.gif)

Seven hospitals have volume above the overall average and twelve have
volume significantly below the overall average.

This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Analysis of
means](../category/AnalysisOfMeans.html), or [Category: Control
charts](../category/ControlCharts.html).
<!---More--->
charts](../category/ControlCharts.html).
means](../category/AnalysisOfMeans.html), or [Category: Control
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Analysis of
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy

<!---Do not use
**[StATS]: When is a control chart not a control
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children's Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children's Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Analysis of
means](../category/AnalysisOfMeans.html), or [Category: Control
charts](../category/ControlCharts.html).
--->

