---
title: Use of diagnostic tests for making clinical decisions
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/07/DiagnosticTalk.html
date: 2007-06-15
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Diagnostic testing
output: html_document
---
I\'m giving a talk for the [American College of Allergy, Asthma, and
Immunology](http://www.acaai.org/) with the title \"Use of diagnostic
tests for making clinical decisions.\" Here\'s an abstract of this talk:

\"Not all diagnostic tests are created equal. Some are so bad that they
cause more harm than good. After reviewing the general formulas for
sensitivity and specificity, I will outline the five phases of research
for development of a diagnostic test proposed by Margaret Pepe. I will
then explain why research in the early phases provides an insufficient
evidence base for making clinical decisions about the utility of a
diagnostic test. Finally, I will illustrate how to apply a diagnostic
test in a practical setting that incorporate clinical judgment and
accounts for individual patient variation. In this talk, you will learn
how to: describe the limitations of diagnostic tests, summarize the five
phase of diagnostic test development, and apply diagnostic tests in a
practical setting.\"

The five phases of development of a diagnostic test appear on page 215
of

-   **The Statistical Evaluation of Medical Tests for Classification and
    Prediction.** Margaret Sullivan Pepe (2003) Oxford, UK: Oxford
    University Press. [\[BookFinder4U
    link\]](http://www.bookfinder4u.com/detail/0198509847.html)

Phase 1 is purely exploratory. The objective is to \"identify promising
tests and settings for application\" and uses a case-control study with
convenience sampling. Phase 2 is a retrospective attempt to validate the
test. The objective is to determine if the test can achieve minimal
standards for sensitivity and specificity. This phase also uses a
case-control design, but with more careful sampling from the overall
population. Phase 3 is a retrospective attempt to refine the test. One
refinement is to develop criteria for determining when the test is
positive. Another refinement is examination of covariates that can
affect the performance of the test.  Studies in this phase may also
compare competing tests and develop a recommended sequence of applying
multiple tests. Phase 4 is prospective attempt to validate the test in a
more realistic setting. This phase uses a prospective cohort and is able
to estimate prevalence dependent characteristics of the test like the
positive predictive value. Phase 5 is an attempt to measure the true
impact of the test on important health outcomes and the economic effect
of the test. It uses a randomized design where some patients are
selected to receive the new test and others are selected to receive the
standard care without the availability of the new test.

There are several biases that can occur in the evaluation of a
diagnostic test. First, there is spectrum bias, a problem that occurs in
most case-control designs. When you select a group of patients who
overtly manifest the disease in question and compare them to a group of
patients who clearly do not have the disease, then you have a black and
white comparison. All the intermediate cases, the ones most difficult to
diagnose properly, are omitted from the study. As a result, these case
control designs tend to overstate the sensitivity and specificity of the
test because they do not include the full spectrum of the disease
process.

Another bias occurs if the gold standard is not applied to all the
patients in the study. When the gold standard is invasive (e.g., a
surgical biopsy) there is a strong desire in the doctors and the
patients to avoid using the gold standard. This can produce verification
bias (also known as workup bias).

A third bias can occur if the gold standard used to diagnose disease is
itself an imperfect standard. Still another bias may occur if the
results of the gold standard are not blinded from those performing the
diagnostic test and the results of the diagnostic test are not blinded
from those performing the gold standard evaluation.
