---
title: Monitoring adverse events during peritoneal dialysis
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/07/PeritonealDialysis.html
date: 2007-11-15
category: Blog post
tags: Adverse events in clinical trials
output: html_document
---
**[StATS]: Monitoring adverse events during
peritoneal dialysis (created 2007-11-15)**.

One of the doctors I was working with had an interesting data set
examining adverse events in patients with peritoneal dialysis. These
patients start treatment with peritoneal dialysis on a specific day and
are followed until they stop this treatment. Reasons for stopping
peritoneal dialysis might be that the patient got better and no longer
needed any treatment, the patient got worse and needed to switch to
hemodialysis, or the patient died. Patients who moved out of town
presumably continued their dialysis, but they were lost to follow-up in
this particular study. There were two adverse events examined: exit site
infections, and peritonitis. Although I ran several complex analyses on
this data set, I thought it might be useful to look at a simpler
approach to monitoring the frequency of adverse events using control
charts.

Here\'s the data on when patients began treatment and when they ended
their treatment.

`id   t0   t1     0   58  680     1   95 1416     2  189 1247     3  207  532     4  402 1136     5  412  501     6  431 1851     7  550 1414     8  581 1339     9  770 2325    10  809 1498    11  841 1339    12  880 1563    13  903 2664    14  939 1451    15  980 2920    16 1106 2103    17 1107 1291    18 1155 1792    19 1159 1654    20 1200 1968    21 1247 1574    22 1422 2247    23 1449 1544    24 1499 2310    25 1582 1755    26 1677 2142    27 1786 2920    28 1799 2108    29 1803 2729    30 2097 2723    31 2101 2639    32 2225 2419    33 2254 2920    34 2496 2920    35 2500 2920    36 2507 2920    37 2562 2730    38 2590 2870    39 2663 2920    40 2701 2838    41 2711 2920`

The first column is the patient id, the second column is when the
patient started dialysis (number of days since the start of the review
period), and the third column is when the patient ended dialysis (again
in number of days).

There were 42 patients in this study. The average patient stayed in the
study for 640 days (1.8 years). We will divide the number of days by 365
in most graphical presentations of the data to show time in years rather
than days.

This graph shows the cumulative number of patients at risk of an adverse
event at any time point in the review period.

![](../../../web/images/07/PeritonealDialysis01.gif)

The vertical line segments at the bottom of the graph represent the
times that patients began dialysis and the segments at the top of the
graph represent the times that patients ended dialysis. Each time a
patent begins dialysis, the graph jumps up one unit. Every time a
patient ends dialysis, the graph drops one unit. At the busiest time,
there were 17 patients on dialysis. The graph falls to zero at 8 years,
not because all patients were removed from dialysis, but because that
represented the end of the observation period.

Notice that this graph generally climbs for the first three years, drops
of a bit then is roughly level for years 4 through 8. This is not
surprising because only patients who began dialysis during the eight
year observation window were included in the study.

Here are the times of exit site infections:

`id   tx     0  643     0  657     1  143     1  203     1  756     1  900     1 1122     1 1331     2  596     3  231     4  905     4  953     4  986     6  680     6 1273     6 1410     6 1485     6 1584     7  967     9 1292    12 1442    13 1331    13 1351    13 2528    13 2658    14  949    14 1261    14 1447    16 1250    21 1267    27 1947    33 2520    33 2767    35 2769`

Notice that some patients experience more than one exit site infection
and some patients experience no infections. You might already notice
something interesting with the data. About half of the events have three
digit days (days in the hundreds). Since the full time range is from
zero to a bit less than 3 thousand, you would expect only about a third
of these events to have three digit days. This is possible evidence that
these events occurred more frequently early in the review period rather
than later. A careful analysis, of course, would have to control for the
number of patients at risk during these time intervals.

Here is the data on times of peritonitis.

`id   tx     0  218     1  652     1 1265     1 1328     3  237     7  641     7 1004     7 1080     9  978     9 1036     9 1236     9 1974     9 2116    10  904    10 1305    13 1815    13 1983    13 2082    14  949    15 2859    20 1959    24 1977    24 2089    25 1620    25 1641    27 1803    27 2354    27 2520    28 1809    28 2054    33 2351    41 2740    41 2755`

The graph below shows the cumulative number of patient years over the
eight year study (you can get this by integrating the figure shown
above). This graph also notes the occurrence of exit site infections
using a red plus sign.

![](../../../web/images/07/PeritonealDialysis02.gif)

Here\'s a second graph with occurrence of peritonitis marked with a red
plus sign.

![](../../../web/images/07/PeritonealDialysis03.gif)

The horizontal distance between successive plus signs represents the
waiting time in years between the successive patients. The vertical
distance between successive plus signs represents the waiting time in
patient-years. It\'s a subtle but important difference. By calculating
the number of patient-years between successive events, you can It
adjusts for the fact that during the first two or three years of
observation, there were fewer patient-years of data compared to
successive years.

If you plot the patient-years between successive exit site infections,
you will see the following control chart.

![](../../../web/images/07/PeritonealDialysis04.gif)

The gray region represents the first four years of the study. After the
fourth year, an intervention was implemented to reduce adverse events.
You can see that it had a dramatic impact at first, with the hospital
twice waiting over 10 patient year between events shortly after the
intervention started. More recently, it looks as if the waiting time has
slipped back at least partway to the norm.

Here\'s the plot for peritonitis events.

![](../../../web/images/07/PeritonealDialysis05.gif)

Notice that there is no evidence that peritonitis is becoming a rarer
event after the intervention.

This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children\'s Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Adverse events in clinical
trials](../category/AdverseEvents.html).
<!---More--->
trials](../category/AdverseEvents.html).
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Adverse events in clinical
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
Children\'s Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy

<!---Do not use
**[StATS]: Monitoring adverse events during
This page was written by Steve Simon while working at Children\'s Mercy
Hospital. Although I do not hold the copyright for this material, I am
reproducing it here as a service, as it is no longer available on the
Children\'s Mercy Hospital website. Need more information? I have a page
with [general help resources](../GeneralHelp.html). You can also browse
for pages similar to this one at [Category: Adverse events in clinical
trials](../category/AdverseEvents.html).
--->

