---
title: Quantifying the ability of dreams to predict the future
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/07/QuantifyingPredictions.html
date: 2007-04-10
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Diagnostic testing
output: html_document
---
Someone wrote to me about a diary they had kept for the past eight years
about their dreams. About every other month or so, a dream of theirs
came true. I was asked if I could quantify the likelihood of successful
predictions.

Assessing psychic phenomena is outside my area of expertise, but I
offered a few general suggestions, partly because I thought that an
analogy to diagnostic testing was interesting.

Generally, it is almost impossible to quantify the success rate of
predictions in dreams in any rigorous fashion. You could start by first
turning the problem around. How often do you have a dream whose
prediction does not come true? The advantage of this approach is that
with dreams, the "hits" are more memorable than the "misses". By
estimating a false positive rate, you force yourself to objectively
evaluate both the "hits" and the "misses".

Even if you get a false positive rate, though, it is unclear how to
interpret that number. If that number is exactly 100% then you have an
easy interpretation: your dreams are worthless as a predictive tool. But
what if that number is smaller than 100%? How much smaller does it have
to be before we chalk it up to more than coincidence?

In medical testing, we evaluate predictions all the time\--it is called
diagnostic testing. This is an imperfect analogy because diagnostic
tests are not predictions about the future, but rather predictions about
events that are otherwise hidden from our view. Still, the analogy is
useful. Evaluation of a diagnostic test requires specifying four
numbers. The first is the number of true positives. In your situation,
these are events that occur and which are predicted by your dreams. For
example, you dream that your brother has a car accident and the next day
he crashes his car into a parked car. According to you there are about 6
per year times 8 years or 48 true positives. Then there are the false
positives. These are events that do not occur but which are predicted by
your dreams. You dream that your brother has a car accident and he
drives safely for the entire day following your dream. You don't state
how often these occur, but if we presume that you have a dream that
makes a prediction every other day, then you would have about 180 per
year times 8 years or 1,440 predictions. 48 are true positives, so the
remaining 1,392 are false positives. If it is every other week, then you
have 24 per year times 8 or 192 predictions and 144 are false positives.
The third number is false negatives. These are the events that occur and
which are not predicted by your dreams. Your brother crashes his car and
your previous night's dream gave no indication that this might happen.
I hesitate to even guess at this number (how good a driver is your
brother?). The fourth number is true negatives. These are events that do
not occur and which your dreams predict will not occur. Your brother
drives safely all the day long and nothing in your previous night's
dream indicated a crash of any kind.

Furthermore, the criteria that are typically used for deciding whether a
dream is a false positive are highly subjective. For example, you dream
that your brother is in a car accident. If your brother is not in a car
accident in the next 24 hours is the dream a false positive? Or do you
expand the time window and say that the dream is a false positive only
if your brother avoids a car accident in the next 7 days. What
constitutes a "car accident". Does your brother have to be the driver
or is he considered to be in a car accident if he is a pedestrian and
another car hits him. Does a car smashing into his parked car while your
brother is inside his house count? How about a large door ding? The
false positive rate for your dreams changes depending on how broadly you
define an accident. It is further compounded by the fact that your
dreams predict different things at different times. So if your dreams
also sometimes seem to predict family illnesses, you have to come up
with an objective criteria for what constitutes an illness.

There's a cute story about this. Linus Pauling actively promoted the
use of massive doses of vitamin C during the last few decades of his
life. He believed it could cure just about anything from the common cold
to cancer. During one interview he explained that after he and his
family started taking Vitamin C supplements, they never had colds. The
interviewer was a bit surprised probed a bit further "No colds? Ever?"
Linus Pauling responded, "Oh just an occasional sniffle."

There are also dreams that fail to make a prediction of any kind. Do you
have an objective rule for deciding which dreams represent predictions
of the future and which dreams just represent pleasant events with no
predictions in them at all? \</p\> \<p\>The problem with even a
carefully crafted diary is that it is impossible to objectively assign
each dream to one of the four categories (true positive, false positive,
false negative, and true negative). An interesting experiment could be
done if you find five other similarly detailed diaries from perfect
strangers. Show the five diaries plus yours to a close friend. Make sure
that any any obvious identifying variables like names and cities are
removed first. Ask that friend to pick out which of the six diaries
mirrors your life most closely. categories.

It is hoping for too much but if your dreams by chance involved a
consistent quantitative element, like the closing figure for the
following day's Dow Jones average, then it's easy to run some
statistics. \</p\> \<p\>Barring that, I think the best you can hope for
is an informal opinion, and you can get that from just about anyone.
There is a mistaken belief that if the informal opinion comes from a
professional statistician, it carries more credibility, but we
statisticians are no better at this task than anyone else.

If you want to pursue this further, you should do some research into
this. You should focus your efforts on what the skeptical community
writes, because this represents a standard of evidence that you need to
provide to convince an outsider that your dreams are unusual. A good
starting point is the Skeptic's Dictionary by Robert Todd Carroll.

-   [www.skepdic.com/dreams.html](http://www.skepdic.com/dreams.html)

There are several active processes that you need to control for like
confirmation bias, subjective validation, and post hoc hypotheses, and
until you are aware of these terms mean, you will not be able to produce
credible evidence.

The temptation is to go instead to a website of those who actively
promote dream divination, but in my experience, these individuals rely
heavily on informal evidence and anecdotes. You don't really need help
developing an informal evaluation about your dreams; in fact, you've
probably already done an informal assessment and want something more
rigorous.
