---
title: Analyzing data from a simple crossover design
author: Steve Simon
source: http://www.pmean.com/07/SimpleCrossover.html
date: 2007-08-22
categories:
- Blog post
tags:
- Analysis of variance
output: html_document
---
A doctor brought me some data from a crossover design and asked me to
help analyze it. The analysis was a bit trickier than I had expected, so
I reviewed some of the material in Stephen Senn's book.

The hallmark of a crossover trial is that it is a study where both the
standard treatment and the experimental treatment are both given to the
same patient. In a parallel group trial, you flip a coin to decide which
treatment a patient gets. In a crossover trial, you flip a coin to
decide the order of the treatments, either the standard treatment
followed by the experimental treatment or the experimental treatment
followed by the standard treatment.

Part of the confusion I had with the crossover design was my failure to
recognize that there are two different ways to present the data. In both
formats, you need to specify the order that was randomly assigned to the
patient. I am using an example data set from the OzDASL website. It
represents a crossover trial where patients received both Vitamin C and
a placebo. Patients who were randomly assigned to receive Vitamin C
followed by placebo are noted by the code VP and patients who were
randomly assigned to receive placebo followed by Vitamin C are noted by
the code PV. The outcome variable is a measure of endurance.

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/07/SimpleCrossover01.gif)

In the format shown above, the endurance measure when the placebo is
given appears in the column labeled "Placebo" and the endurance
measure when Vitamin C is given appears in the column labeled
"Vitamin."

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/07/SimpleCrossover02.gif)

In the format shown here, the endurance measured the first time appears
in the column labeled "T1" and the endurance measured the second time
appears in the column labeled "T2." The two formats look similar, but
when the order is VP (patients 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14, and 15) the values
for T1 and T2 are reversed from the values for Placebo and Vitamin.

You can compute a paired t-test with the data in either format. When you
compute a paired t-test in the first format, it is testing whether there
is a difference between the placebo treatment and the Vitamin C
treatment, assuming that there is no period effect. When you compute a
paired t-test in the second format, it is testing whether there is a
difference between the first period and the second period, assuming
there is no treatment effect. What I really needed was a test that
allowed for looking at both treatment effects and period effects
simultaneously. To do this effectively, it helps to produce a third
format for the data.

![](http://www.pmean.com/new-images/07/SimpleCrossover03.gif)

In the format shown above, the endurance values appear in a single
column. Since endurance is measured twice on each of 15 patients, this
requires a total of 30 rows. For each of the individual endurance
values, you have to note which patient it is (the column labeled id),
whether the endurance was measured after treatment with Vitamin C or
placebo (the column labeled treatment), whether the endurance was
measured during the first period or during the second period, whether
the patients was randomly assigned to the PV order or the VP order (the
column labeled Order) and finally what the actual endurance value was
(the column labeled Endurance).

The second point of confusion that I had was my failure to recognize a
redundancy among the treatment, Period, and Order variables. If you
specify any two of these three variables, then the third one is
determined automatically. For example, if you knew that the treatment
Vitamin was during period T1 and that the treatment Placebo was during
period T2, then you would know without fail that the Order would have to
be VP.

This redundancy produces two major insights. First, you can't test for
treatment, period, and order effects simultaneously. Second, you can't
test for a treatment by period interaction. If you code the treatment
and Period columns using -1 and +1, then the product of these two
columns would be identical to a -1 and +1 coding for Order.

`Id Tr Pe Or T*P   1   1 -1 -1 -1   1 -1   1 -1 -1   2   1   1   1   1   2 -1 -1   1   1   3   1 -1 -1 -1   3 -1   1 -1 -1   4   1   1   1   1   4 -1 -1   1   1   5   1 -1 -1 -1   5 -1   1 -1 -1   6   1   1   1   1   6 -1 -1   1   1   7   1 -1 -1 -1   7 -1   1 -1 -1   8   1   1   1   1   8 -1 -1   1   1   9   1 -1 -1 -1   9 -1   1 -1 -1        10   1   1   1   1        10 -1 -1   1   1        11   1 -1 -1 -1        11 -1   1 -1 -1        12   1   1   1   1        12 -1 -1   1   1        13   1   1   1   1        13 -1 -1   1   1        14   1 -1 -1 -1        14 -1   1 -1 -1        15   1 -1 -1 -1        15 -1   1 -1 -1`

This failure to recognize the redundancy meant that I failed to
understand that in a two period crossover design, you cannot test for a
treatment by period interaction. Only a more complex crossover design,
such as a design with four periods and two crossovers, will allow you to
test for such an interaction.

In a future weblog entry, I will show a formal analysis of the crossover
data.
